Background Due to the persistence of tobacco-related health disparities in the U.S., there is a need for innovative strategies to reach the underserved ethnic minority populations who are most at risk. As contemplations for health behavior modification tend to surge on Mondays, we explored the feasibility and effect of a Monday-enhanced smoking cessation program on quitting outcomes in a low-income ethnic minority community. Aims To compare a Monday-enhanced with a standard Communities Engaged and Advocating for a Smoke-free Environment (CEASE) program and understand the overall experiences of participants in the program. Methods In this mixed-methods study, affordable housing complexes (n = 4) and a church were randomly assigned either a Monday-enhanced (n = 3) or standard (n = 2) CEASE smoking cessation program. CEASE comprised twelve weekly group counseling sessions facilitated by trained peer motivators plus nicotine replacement products. Participants in the Mondayenhanced arm were encouraged to pick Mondays as a quitting day. Quantitative and qualitative data were collected during the program and at 3-month post-graduation. Results Seventy-seven participants were enrolled in the study arms. In both groups combined, tobacco consumption reduced from 7.7 to 5.6 cig/day (mean reduction, 2.1; 95% CI: 0.9 to 5.1, p = 0.08). Although no significant difference in quit rate was observed between the two arms, more participants completed the follow-up survey in the Monday-enhanced than standard CEASE program [82.4% vs. 36.0%, p < 0.05]. While qualitative data suggested an overall satisfaction of participants with the program, motivation for quitting was higher in the Monday-enhanced CEASE program compared to the standard CEASE program. Conclusion The Monday-enhanced program is promising and may enhance participants’ engagement and willingness to quit smoking, particularly in low-income ethnic minority communities. introduction Tobacco use remains the leading cause of preventable disease, disability, and death in the United States (U.S.) [1]. In addition to the direct human costs, each year, smoking puts a significant financial burden on the healthcare system: cigarette smoking cost the U.S. over $600 billion in 2018 including over $240 billion in healthcare spending and almost $372 in lost productivitiy [1]. Despite significant gains made in
reducing smoking prevalence over the past decades, there are still persistent and large disparities in tobacco use and associated health problems in certain racial, ethnic, and low socioeconomic status populations. Compared to the general U.S. adult population, the rate of cigarette smoking is higher in individuals who live below the poverty level and have lower levels of educational attainment [2, 3]. Racial and ethnic minority residents of assisted public housing living in inner cities are also among the most vulnerable populations for tobacco disparities. [1] In addition to lower access to treatment and higher stigma, predatory targeting by the tobacco industry has contributed to the existing tobacco disparities in the United States [4, 5]. * Shervin Assari assari@umich.edu Extended author information available on the last page of the article
1 3
A large body of evidence indicates that smoking cessation is a cost-effective health intervention [6]. Evidence-based smoking cessation interventions include behavioral modifications administered at the individual, group, or remote settings and approved pharmacotherapies. Studies show that several treatment methods are effective even if used alone, but the largest cessation rates are obtained by the combined use of both behavioral interventions and pharmacotherapies [7–12]. Group behavioral therapy and group counseling have been shown to be more effective in helping individuals to quit smoking than self-help and other less intensive interventions [13]. In a group therapy setting, a smoker gains benefits from behavioral techniques (i.e., modeling and reinforcement), from the mutual support and having a sense of belonging [14]. Temporal landmarks, especially those that signal new beginnings (e.g., the New Year, first day of the month or week), encourage goal initiation and bolster individuals’ motivation in pursuing their aspiration to implement behavioral changes. It is suggested that these landmarks may bring psychological disassociation from the individual’s perceived imperfect self-image in the past [15]. A survey of Google Search queries conducted during 2005–2012 that included the word “healthy” and were classified as health-related by Google showed healthy searches peaked on Mondays and Tuesdays thereafter, declining until recovering modestly on Sundays. This finding suggested a so-called weekly clock for healthy contemplations [16]. Observing these weekly rhythms, researchers have postulated that behavioral interventions such as smoking cessation programs could benefit from targeting those specific days when people are most interested in behavior change. Such a strategy would require adapting health programs to coincide with those days of the week [16]. There is, however, limited research on using these temporal landmarks, specifically Mondays, in tobacco cessation interventions. One study showed an increased self-efficacy to quit in an intervention arm using Monday as a day to quit or recommit to quitting smoking [17]. Further research is needed to strengthen the evidence for this phenomenon and encourage using this concept in smoking cessation interventions. aim We compared a Monday-enhanced and standard CEASE smoking cessation program in a mixed-method study. This study was designed in succession to the previous phases of CEASE, an existing smoking cessation program. The collaboration for the study was forged by reinforcing CEASE’s expertise in community-based smoking cessation programs with the Johns Hopkins’ Institute for Global Tobacco Control (IGTC)’s research and evaluation expertise and the
innovative QSQM (Quit and Stay Quit) material of The Monday Campaigns (TMC) organization [17–23]. methods This study, conducted in 2020, emanated from a communitybased smoking cessation program for underserved ethnic minority communities in Baltimore City. This mixed-methods study had a quantitative and a qualitative aim. The quantitative purpose compared the effectiveness of integrating the QSQM approach into our standard CEASE smoking cessation curriculum. The qualitative aim captured the program’s feasibility and participants’ experience. the standard cease arm CEASE is a community-driven smoking cessation initiative that evolved through a collaboration between Morgan State University and residents of several Baltimore City communities with a mission to educate, encourage, and support individuals to choose a smoke-free lifestyle. CEASE mainly focuses on underserved and low-income populations that lack affordable, consistent, or accessible community healthrelated resources [18, 24]. The CEASE initiative from 2002, working through the Prevention Sciences Research Center (PSRC) of Morgan State University and several collaborative partnerships with the local communities, has implemented four phases of tobacco cessation programs serving several thousand residents in Baltimore City with the emergence of a tobacco cessation curriculum tailored to the underserved urban population. The standard intervention included holding 12 weekly smoking cessation group counseling sessions for current smokers (study participants). These sessions were held on weekdays other than Mondays. Community members, called peer motivators, who were former smokers, were trained in counseling techniques, motivational interviewing, delivering the 12-week smoking cessation intervention, and principles of human subjects research ethics [25]. Peer motivator support and guidance were provided according to the CEASE Today tobacco cessation curriculum using a manual which comprised three modules: (i) motivation and preparation, delivered over 3 weeks; (ii) planning to quit, delivered over 6 weeks; and (iii) relapse prevention, delivered in 3 weeks [26]. The manual also had activities aligned with each module for engaging the participants. Training on the use of nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) products (patches, lozenges, and gum), provision of free NRT samples, and directions on how to get free additional supplies from the state Quit Line were provided by the peer motivators. 1 3 the monday‑enhanced cease arm We delivered the Monday-enhanced CEASE via The Monday Campaigns (TMC) initiative. TMC is a non-profit collaborative public health initiative that promotes sustainable behavior change by dedicating every Monday to health. The program has been associated with Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Mailman School of Public Health at Columbia University, Maxwell School of Citizenship and Public Affairs at Syracuse University, and NYU Langone Health. It encompasses various health-oriented programs, including Quit and Stay Quit Monday (QSQM), Meatless Monday, Move it Monday, Destress Monday, The Kids Cook Monday, and Caregiver Monday [27]. As part of The Monday Campaigns, QSQM uses Monday to check in on an individual's progress with cessation or recommitment to quitting tobacco if that person has relapsed. QSQM is a tobacco cessation tool designed by The Monday Campaigns in collaboration with the Institute for Global Tobacco Control and the Lerner Center for Public Health Promotion at Johns Hopkins University. QSQM encourages people to quit, re-quit or recommit to quit smoking every Monday. Since its inception, various organizations have adopted its module with successful outcomes. The Monday-enhanced CEASE program comprised the components of our standard CEASE program in addition to QSQM practices such as holding classes only on Mondays and asking participants to set their quit days on a Monday. Participants also benefited from QSQM materials and procedures, including Monday check-ins and Monday motivational messages. The Monday check-ins utilized specific questions to assess participants’ performance and efforts to quit smoking during the previous week. The Monday motivational messages were presented in the form of visuals and fliers to motivate participants on various smoking cessationrelated topics. The peer motivators delivered the 12-week Monday-enhanced smoking cessation intervention using the CEASE today manual, the QSQM materials, and procedures. A mixed-methods approach was used to compare the effectiveness of the Monday-enhanced CEASE program with the standard CEASE program and to understand the experiences of participants with the program. The study sites were randomized into those using the standard CEASE curriculum or those adopting the Monday-enhanced CEASE curriculum. In the quantitative component, the Mondayenhanced CEASE program was compared with the standard CEASE to test and quantify the benefit of adding the QSQM component to our standard program. The qualitative component utilized focus group discussions (FGDs) and indepth interviews (IDIs) of participants, site coordinators, and peer motivators to understand their experiences with standard CEASE or Monday-enhanced CEASE programs. Their perceptions of the strengths and challenges of the
program and their recommendations for program improvement were also sought. site selection Leveraging on the long-standing community partnerships built by CEASE in Baltimore City over the years, several community organizations and public housing complexes were contacted to participate in the program. Out of several that accepted to participate, four public housing complexes and one church received information and eligibility screening sessions for their community residents. The COVID19 pandemic resulted in a halt to further site enrollment; therefore, other interested sites could not be included at that point. In each of the five enrolled study sites, site coordinators who were contact persons representing participants at the site acted as a vital link between the peer motivators, the study participants, and the program partnership. Peer motivators and site coordinators established a reliable channel of frequent communication. Site coordinators helped create awareness and disseminate information about the program to their residents. They assisted with the program’s logistics, such as ensuring the provision of meeting space, setting up meeting reminders, and following up with participants on their site. They also relayed feedback from the participants who were their residents to the research team. As the execution of the program coincided with the COVID-19 pandemic and the associated imposed lockdowns, the site coordinators played a key role in finding alternative ways to reach the study participants. participant recruitment and data collection For the quantitative component, participants were recruited by the joint efforts of the site coordinators and the peer motivators using participant recruitment flyers, word-of-mouth, and personal referrals. Information sessions were held at the study sites, and a screening questionnaire was used to determine participant eligibility. Participants who were 21 years and older and current smokers (smoked at least three cigarettes per day in the past week and have smoked at least 100 cigarettes in their lifetime) were selected to participate in the program. Pregnant women, those who were not currently smoking or only smoking occasionally, and those deemed mentally impaired were excluded from the program. Those who met the enrollment criteria and provided informed consent were invited to participate in the weekly smoking cessation program administered over 12 weeks. For current smokers who were not interested in participating in the program, a self-help material (CEASE today tobacco cessation manual), NRT samples and instructions, and a list of available resources for tobacco quitting were offered. Randomization to either the standard or the Monday-enhanced
1 3
CEASE program was done at the site level. During the first session, participants completed a baseline survey and had their expired carbon monoxide (CO) levels measured to confirm their current smoking status. During the 12-week program, participants completed weekly progress forms, and 3 months after completing the program, a follow-up survey was conducted for participants. Quantitative data was collected during enrollment, weekly sessions, and follow-up 3 months after the program ended. In the qualitative component, FGD subjects were recruited from each of the study sites via phone calls made by the peer motivators, flyers posted on boards or distributed through their communities, or by invitations from the site coordinators. IDIs were held with the program participants and the site coordinators. Participants were compensated with $20 as an appreciation of their time in FGDs and $50 for taking part in the IDIs. FGDs and IDIs were conducted until no significant new information emerged, and the investigators considered the information to be saturated. Three virtual FGDs, with four members per group, were conducted; two with CEASE participants facilitated by peer motivators and one with peer motivators facilitated by research team members. A total of twenty IDIs were held with the program participants facilitated by peer motivators. To avoid any potential bias, peer motivators were assigned to interview participants from sites other than those that they facilitated during the implementation phase of the program. quantitative assessment Smoking status at the completion of the cessation program was ascertained. The primary outcomes of interest for this project at the 12-week post-program follow-up were smoking abstinence and the number of cigarettes smoked. The 12-week follow-up period was determined based on research showing a 6-month period as the consensus for an ideal abstinence and follow-up duration [28, 29]. Participants in our program were allowed to quit upon enrollment into the 12-week program. With a 12-week follow-up period after the program, they would have a total duration of 6 months to achieve smoking cessation. Participants were categorized as “quit” or “didn’t quit” based on smoking abstinence verified by expired-air CO levels at the time of follow-up. A level of ≤ 7 ppm was considered as an optimal level for “quit,” while > 7 ppm was considered as “didn’t quit.” This level was estimated based on other literature, which showed a sensitivity of 90% and specificity of 83% when using a cut-off CO level of 6.5 ppm to assess smoking status. Other studies show varying CO cut-off levels with varying sensitivities and specificities [30–32]. Questions measuring participants’ Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence (Fagerström score) were asked at the time of enrollment. The Fagerström Test for Nicotine
Dependence (FTND) is a validated standardized smoking assessment for use in smokers. It includes six questions that evaluate the quantity of cigarette consumption (number of cigarettes smoked per day), the compulsion to use (time it takes after waking up to smoke first cigarette, difficulty in refraining from smoking in places where it is forbidden, cigarette that would be most difficult to give up), and dependence (smoking during the first hours of waking up, smoking even when ill and in bed). On the FTND, the yes/no items are scored 0 or 1 and multiple-choice items are scored from 0 to 3. The questions sum up to a total maximum of 10 points. The higher the points, the greater the nicotine dependence [33, 34]. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, we were unable to measure breath CO at follow-up; therefore, we relied on participants’ self-report to categorize them into those who “quit” or “didn’t quit.” The main independent variable of interest was program type. Participants were categorized as either attending the standard or Monday-enhanced CEASE program. Information on sociodemographic characteristics, including race, age, gender, employment status, marital status, and educational attainment, was collected. Retention, defined as attending six or more of the total twelve smoking cessation classes offered, was determined. Participants were categorized as “not retained” if they attended fewer than six classes. qualitative assessment The qualitative evaluation was conducted 3 months after the smoking cessation programs ended. The qualitative design employed data triangulation using focus group discussions (FGDs) and structured individual in-depth interviews (IDIs) from three groups of respondents: the program participants, the peer motivators, and the site coordinators. Information about the experiences, knowledge, and perceptions of those involved in the CEASE programs, i.e., standard and Monday-enhanced CEASE programs, based on the role they played in the program were obtained through the qualitative assessment. The goal was to compare the experiences of participants in the Monday-enhanced CEASE program with that of participants in the standard CEASE program and also to understand the overall experiences of participants, site coordinators, and peer motivators with the program. Separate FGD and IDI guides were developed for program participants, peer motivators, and site coordinators. Participants’ FGD guide consisted of questions about their experience with the program, program effectiveness, challenges, and recommendations for future programs. The peer motivators’ FGD guide comprised questions that aimed to explore their experiences, feedback on program effectiveness, and their recommendations for future implementation of the program. IDI guides were developed for study participants and the site coordinators. The interview guide
1 3
for participants consisted of questions and probes about their experience from recruitment, their awareness and perceptions of the quitting program and the QSQM concept, their level of satisfaction with the programs, the challenges they encountered, and their recommendations for future program implementation. The site coordinator interview guide included questions and probes about their experience with coordination, program logistics, and perceptions of the relationship between the program and its institution. It also inquired about the challenges, especially those imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and asked for their recommendations. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, interviews were conducted virtually via Zoom’s video communication platform. After obtaining verbal informed consent, interviews were recorded. Recordings and transcription files were downloaded and saved in secure files accessible only to the research team with training on human subjects research ethics. data analysis Quantitative data from the questionnaires were entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet and exported to Stata 14 for analyses [35]. The two study arms were compared at baseline, and at follow-up by age, gender, racial background, educational level, the average number of cigarettes smoked per day, and participants’ Fagerström scores at the time of enrollment. Categorical variables were reported in proportions using chi-square tables, and continuous variables were reported using means and standard deviations. For the qualitative data, FGDs and IDIs were either audio recorded with a voice recorder or video recorded through Zoom. All recordings were then transcribed, and the transcripts were coded using Atlas.9.1 [36]. The initial codebook for analysis was developed and structured according to the open-ended interview guides used in the study. Two researchers coded each transcript separately and then crosschecked to verify the analysis and form a consensus of the coding for every transcript. Each interview group (CEASE participants, peer motivators, and site coordinators) was analyzed separately for emergent themes, and the data for participants was compared by study arm. Integration of the two data types was achieved using a convergent parallel design. ethical considerations Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval for this study was obtained from the Morgan State University IRB. Participants’ information obtained was kept strictly confidential. Unique identification numbers were assigned to participants and used for the purpose of data analyses. Participants were advised that their participation was
completely voluntary. Peer motivators who all completed the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health field data collector training [25] safeguarded and securely transported the collected materials, including identifiable information, from the study sites to the Morgan State University Prevention Science Research Center for data entry and analyses. Recorded audio or video files were saved electronically in a passworded location shared by CITI-trained research team members. results  quantitative findings  baseline characteristics Of the 87 individuals that expressed their interest and were screened, 77 were eligible to participate, and 64 of the eligible participants attended the first session. Table 1 provides the baseline and sociodemographic characteristics of the study participants. Out of 64 individuals who attended the first session, 27 participants (42.2%) were assigned to the standard CEASE arm, and 37 participants (57.8%) were assigned to the Monday-enhanced CEASE study arm. There was a statistically significant difference in gender distribution between the two study arms: while 41.7% of the participants in the standard CEASE group were male, they constituted only 17.6% of participants in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group (p = 0.03). Overall, 86.2% of the study population was African American. Age and educational attainment were not significantly different between the two groups. fagerström test for nicotine dependence scores Table 2 summarizes the tobacco product type, the number of cigarettes smoked daily, and the Fagerström score at the time of enrollment. There was no statistically significant difference in the type of tobacco product used among the two groups (p = 0.42). The overall average number (SD) of cigarettes smoked per day was 8.4 (5.4), with no statistically significant difference between the two groups (p = 0.91). The Fagerström score for Nicotine Dependence scores did not significantly differ between the two groups. (p = 0.96). Smoking Status of Program Participants at Follow‑Up
Participants were followed up starting 3 months after the last (12th) cessation session. Due to the lockdown and social distancing resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, the
1 3
Ta bl
e 1
B as
el in
e ch
ar ac
te ris
tic s o
f p ar
tic ip
an ts
b y
stu dy
a rm
a nd
si te
* T ho
se w
ho a
tte nd
ed th
e fir
st se
ss io
n of
th e
pr og
ra m
† C om
pr is
in g
th os
e se
lfde
cl ar
ed a
s m or
e th
an o
ne ra
ce o
r N at
iv e
A m
er ic
an /A
la sk an ‡ G ra du at e eq ui va le nc y de gr ee
St an
da rd
C EA
SE A
rm M
on da
yen
ha nc
ed C
EA SE
A rm
A ll*
A ll St an
da rd
C EA
SE Li
fe C
hu rc
h M
on um
en t E
as t
A ll M on
da y-
en ha
nc ed
C
EA SE
M cC
ul lo
h Pe
de st
al G
ar de
ns J.
Va n
St or
y
A ge
a nd
g en
de r
A ll
n 64
27 11
16 37
13 14 10 A ge (S D ) 54 .9 (1 0. 2) 56 .5 (8 .2 ) 53 .5 (1 1. 3) 58 .9 (3 .5 ) 53 .7 (1 1. 3) 58 .4 (5 .8 ) 49 .5 (8 .8 ) 53
.3 (1
8. 5)
M al
e n
(% )
19 (3
1. 1)
12 (4
8. 0)
5 (4
5. 4)
7 (4
6. 7)
7 (2
0. 0)
3 (2
3. 1)
1 (7
.1 )
3 (4
1. 9)
A ge
(S D
) 53
.0 (1
2. 6)
53 .9
(1 0. 7) 45
.8 (1
2. 3)
59 .7
(4 .0
) 51
.4 (1
6. 2)
61 .1
(2 .8
) 50
.8 (N
A )
41 .9
(2 2. 3) Fe m al e n (% ) 41 (6 8. 9) 13 (5 2. 0) 6 (5 4. 6) 8 (5 3. 3) 28 (8 0. 0) 10 (7 6. 9) 13 (9 2. 9) 5 (6 0. 1) A ge (S D ) 55 .7 (8 .8 ) 58 .9 (3 .9 ) 60 .0 (4 .8 ) 58 .1 (2 .9 ) 54 .3 (1 0. 1) 57 .7 (6 .3 ) 49 .4 (9 .2 ) 60 .1 (1 3. 9) R ac ia l b ac kg ro un d A fr ic an A m er ic an n (% ) 50 (8 6. 2) 19 (7 9. 2) 6 (6 0. 0) 13 (9 2. 9) 32 (9 1. 3) 10 (8 3. 3) 14 (1 00 .0 ) 8 (8 0. 0) C au ca si an n (% ) 5 (8 .6 ) 4 (1 6. 7) 3 (3 0. 0) 1 (7 .1 ) 1 (2 .9 ) 0 (0 .0 ) 0 (0 .0 ) 1 (1 0. 0) O th er † n (% ) 3 (5 .2 ) 1 (4 .1 ) 1 (1 0. 0) 0 (0 .0 ) 2 (5 .8 ) 2 (1 6. 6) 0 (0 .0 ) 1 (1 0. 0) Ed uc at io n N o hi gh sc ho ol d ip lo m a, tr ad e sc ho ol d ip lo m a, or G ED ‡ n (% ) 16 (2 8. 1) 2 (8 .3 ) 1 (1 0. 0) 1 (7 .1 ) 15 (4 4. 1) 4 (3 6. 4) 6 (4 2. 9) 5 (6 2. 5) H ig h sc ho ol d ip lo m a, tr ad e sc ho ol d ip lo m a, o r G ED n (% ) 25 (4 3. 8) 12 (5 0. 0) 3 (3 0. 0 9 (6 4. 3) 13 (3 8. 2) 4 (3 6. 4) 6 (4 2. 9) 3 (3 7. 5) So m e ye ar s o f c ol le ge o r m or e n (% ) 16 (2 8. 1) 10 (4 1. 7) 6 (6 0. 0) 4 (2 8. 6) 5 (1 7. 6) 3 (2 7. 2) 2 (1 4. 2) 0 (0 .0 )
1 3
follow-up interviews were done over the phone. Also, due to the potential health risks and regulatory precautions resulting from the pandemic, CO-level breath tests were not performed. Overall, 38 participants were successfully followed up. Of those 38 participants who completed the follow-up, 9 (36.0%) and 29 (82.4%) were from the standard CEASE and the Monday-enhanced CEASE groups, respectively, a difference which was statistically significant (p < 0.001). Participants were asked about their smoking status at the time of follow-up. Table 3 provides information on the number of participants who indicated that they were smoke-free for the past 3 months, past month, past week, or at the time of follow-up. Nearly one in four (n = 9, 24.3%) individuals who completed the follow up indicated that they were smoke free at the time of follow-up. The number (percentage) of participants in the standard CEASES and Monday-enhanced CEASE program arms of the study that were smoke free at the time of follow up were 2 (22.2%) and 7 (25%), respectively, with no statistically significant difference between the quit rates of both study arms (p = 0.91). tobacco product use at follow‑up At the time of the follow-up, we also asked participants the number of cigarettes they smoked per day if they were current smokers. Table 4 shows the average (SD) number of cigarettes smoked per day at the time of enrollment and follow-up. Overall, from enrollment to follow-up, mean (SD) of cigarettes smoked per day decreased from 7.7 (5.1) to 5.6 (5.7); however, this reduction was not statistically significant (mean reduction, 2.1; 95% CI: − 0.9 to 5.1, p = 0.08). In the standard CEASE group, the average (SD) of cigarettes smoked per day decreased from 8.6 (4.7) at enrollment to 4.0 (1.1) at follow-up, but it was not statistically significant (p = 0.06). Likewise, there was a non-statistically significant reduction (p = 0.23) in the use of daily cigarettes in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group, decreasing from 7.4 (5.3) cigarettes per day at the time of enrollment to 6.0 (6.5) cigarettes per day at follow-up. The average attendance rate of participants dropped by 53.6% after the session format changed from in-person to
Table 3 Smoking status and change in number of cigarettes smoked by program participants at the time of follow-up
* Percentages reflect the number of those who completed follow up compared to the total number of participants in the program (first column), or each study arm (second and third columns) † Percentages reflect the number in each category compared to the total number of participants who completed the follow-up
All Standard CEASE Arm
Monday-enhanced CEASE Arm P value
Completed follow-up n (%)* 37 (62.7) 9 (36.0) 28 (82.4) 0.01 Smoke-free past three months n (%)† 5 (13.5) 1 (11.1) 4 (14.3) 0.72 Smoke-free past month n (%)† 6 (16.2) 2 (22.2) 4 (14.3) 0.81 Smoke-free past week n (%)† 9 (24.3) 2 (22.2) 7 (25.0) 0.94 Currently smoke-free n (%)† 9 (24.3) 2 (22.2) 7 (25.0) 0.94
* Participants for whom both enrollment and follow-up values were available † p value for the two-sample t-test with unequal variances for the difference between values at enrollment and follow-up
1 3
over-the-phone conference calls (due to the COVID-19 pandemic). This decline was similar across the study arms: 54.9% in the standard CEASE and 52.7% in the Mondayenhanced CEASE group. qualitative findings Study subjects participated in a total of four FGDs and twenty IDIs. In addition, four site coordinators attended the IDIs and four peer motivators took part in FGDs. The input from the FGDs and IDIs fell into three major categories: (1) overall experience, (2) perceptions of the QSQM concept, and (3) recommendations for future programs. overall experience Participants, site coordinators, and peer motivators discussed their overall experiences in terms of the program’s effectiveness and the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. participants In terms of their overall perception of the program, a majority of the participants expressed their high satisfaction with the program and indicated that they found the program very effective. They also expressed that they were pleased to have the program in their communities. As one participant said,
“… I know some people do come in because the program is really good. It was very effective.” Another said, “… I felt like I had more energy, and I could breathe more; better than times when I go out on a walk for maybe fifteen minutes, and I'll be panting.”
Even though the overall satisfaction with the program was evenly distributed between participants from the standard CEASE and the Monday-enhanced CEASE groups, participants in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group expressed more motivation in quitting or cutting down on smoking than those in the standard CEASE group. On program effectiveness, a large proportion of the participants thought that the program was very effective. One participant said:
“I really stopped smoking, … Yes, the activities are relevant to helping us quit.” Others discussed the program’s influence in helping them quit or cut down on smoking: “Yes, I haven’t had a cigarette since February 2020.” “... that’s what made me stop for four months.” Some said that the program hugely increased their knowledge of the dangers of smoking and the harmful chemical components of tobacco products. “I learned so much about what the cigarette really is, all the ingredients, what it does to you and just a lot of
information in the booklet.” “She really taught us a lot of stuff that we didn't know as far as smoking, stop smoking, withdrawal symptoms, and stuff like that so it was a really nice class.”
Participants also shared their views on the performance of the peer motivators and provided feedback on the role they played and on the quality of their interactions. In addition, they shared their experiences of having peer support in a group counseling setting. Participants of both groups were equally satisfied with the role that the peer motivators played in helping them quit or reduce their smoking. They said they were taught valuable lessons that helped them towards smoking cessation. Talking about her peer motivator, one participant said:
When my coach came here, she demonstrated different things: we watched videos. We saw pictures. She wrote on the board the things that we needed to know and needed to do. Their comments reflected the effectiveness of the peer motivators and the vital role they played in motivating the participants towards a smoke-free life:
The gentleman that did the program with us: He was exceptionally awesome. He was motivating. He was very lovable and I’ll give him the highest regard and respect. The man helped me a great deal. On group support, participants in both groups spoke favorably of the support they received from fellow participants. For instance, they supported one another in punctuality and in regularly attending the classes. They also held one another accountable and persuaded each other to stick to their quitting goals. Interestingly, some participants stated that others’ success challenged them to try and achieve their own quitting goals:
“We would look at each other and try to hold each other in a nice way accountable.” “I think it is very effective at the beginning because we all got to meet, we got to learn different things when we’re together.”
Regarding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the program, participants indicated that the pandemic negatively impacted the program’s effectiveness in terms of quitting or cutting down on smoking. However, some blamed the perceived negative impact on the change in the format of the classes from in-person group meetings to group phone calls:
“Due to COVID, some of the programs have been slowed down. We did not have access to gathering all together” “Well because of the pandemic, and because of how they have the restrictions around here, we don’t see each other that much anymore, and I miss in-person [interactions] that we had in my class” “it was better
1 3
when it was hands-on[in-person] because I had a better understanding and [the peer motivator] explained the questions to me when I didn’t understand.”
Some others attributed the change in their smoking behavior to the added anxiety and stress directly or indirectly related to the pandemic:
Once the pandemic hit I wasn’t thinking about not smoking; That was the least of my worries because my rental was an amount of money I couldn’t afford, and I was worried about all of those things, so they just made me smoke more because I was stressed. Some related their lack of success in quitting smoking to the boredom and inactivity as a result of the lockdown due to the pandemic:
… I do believe after this corona thing I can go out, work more; one needs to find something to do with one’s time and that’s why I said corona is a big reason why I’m still smoking. While many participants regarded the COVID-19 pandemic as a hindrance to their quitting effort, one participant indicated that the COVID-19 pandemic motivated her to be more decisive in quitting smoking:
It affected me in a way that I think of quitting smoking more than I did before because it is more risky to continue smoking. Certainly, you don’t want to keep smoking and then have COVID-19 ….. from what I’m told and what I know about COVID it attacks your lungs and cigarette smoking reduces your ability to process oxygen through your lungs which will make you more vulnerable. peer motivators On their experiences and perceptions of the program as a whole, one of the peer motivators, who used to be a smoker and a graduate of one of the previous CEASE smoking cessation classes, expressed how grateful and humbled he/she was. He/she stated that he/she felt thankful for the opportunity to help others in their quitting journey. Another former participant also said he/she was grateful for being a former participant and for being able to support current smokers to live healthier lives. The peer motivators also shared their experiences on how the COVID-19 pandemic impacted the program. Not surprisingly, all the peer motivators indicated that the COVID19 pandemic and the associated lockdown brought many challenges to the program. As one peer motivator indicated:
Due to COVID-19, potential participants that were willing to quit were not able to, due to the inconsistency with the conference calls. The negative impact of the pandemic was reflected in the observation of another peer motivator:
We were on a really good path until COVID-19. A somehow more positive impression about the effects of the pandemic was reflected in another peer motivator’s view when he/shse said:
It was a trying time but it was a great experience. site coordinators With regard to their perceptions on the effectiveness of the program in helping participants change their smoking behavior, the site coordinators thought it was successful. A site coordinator said:
I was happy to hear that a lot of people were able to quit successfully through your program. Another told us that there were participants who did not quit smoking totally, but they managed to cut down on their smoking. A lot of them went down significantly from how many [cigarettes they were smoking] when they started the program to fewer when the program stopped. Another site coordinator shared her view on the effectiveness of the program by saying:
I think it was very effective. Like I said, the success rate was high. It was a lot of interviews and residents who actually stopped smoking and some that I see that went from smoking a pack a day that went down to like three or four a day. So just for those weeks alone I really saw success in the residents. While the program intended to change smoking behavior of the study participants, site coordinators shared with us some pleasant indirect benefits of the program:
“These programs bring an opportunity for people to get together as well and bond,” said one site coordinator. Also, one site coordinator said that the program helped her and other members of the facility management team learn about the underlying reasons for the smoking of their residents:
“We also found reasoning behind why a lot of the residents do smoke,” she said. With regard to the impact of the COVID-19 program on the program and coping strategies, site coordinators shared about the many challenges they had in running the day-today operations of the facilities. One site coordinator told us:
1 3
I believe it was January of this year and month three we had to do a shutdown because of COVID and so, CEASE just like every other program had to make adjustments going back to what I said earlier about building the plane as it is in flight. So, everyone had to make adjustments, and CEASE did the same thing. I had to make adjustments, the residents had to make adjustments as well; So, I cannot say that they should have done this or that better. I think that they did exactly what the program was supposed to do in the midst of a pandemic so I have no complaints about it. As the situation with COVID-19 evolved, the site coordinators, like other members of the management team, had to make adjustments. One of the site coordinators shared her experience by telling us:
They [residents] open the door, and we communicate like that. For the assessments for residents who want weekly calls or biweekly calls I had to call them; I ask them questions, mainly: [Do]you have your medication for the next two weeks? Do you have food? Do you have toilet paper? Do you have a support system? Who's in your support system? Um, have you talked to [them]? Another site coordinator said:
A virtual class which I’ve been trying to get started. At least in our community space if the partners can’t come in, we could meet virtually, and I could put up a screen or something so then there would be at least a community space to keep them six feet apart. One study-site coordinator shared her experience by telling us:
[What] we had to do was transition into doing a lot of “grab and go” kind of thing so they would come to pick up their package[s] and leave. We no longer have the gatherings, and then we moved into [having] a lot of conferences; So, we did the conference calls where they could dial in at a certain time, and so our programs were left like that and we also started some virtual things and then once in the summer when they kind of eased up on some of the [mandates], we had limited groups of not more than six people, so we would do double programs so that other people have a chance to participate. perceptions on the qsqm concept and messaging  participants We asked participants in both standard CEASE and Monday-enhanced CEASE groups about their knowledge, understanding and perception of the QSQM concept as well as
the relevance of the Monday messaging and materials. Even though most participants demonstrated awareness about CEASE as an umbrella program, some of them (mostly in the standard CEASE group) did not initially fully understand the QSQM concept. After the concept was explained to them, almost all participants said that they thought the QSQM concept was beneficial. This finding was observed more in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group participants. One participant said,
Monday is always a good day to quit … because that’s the beginning of the week and why not start fresh at the beginning of the week rather than wait till the weekend. Another said,
For me, every Monday is a good day to start all over again. Notably, even some of the standard CEASE group participants who had not received prior information about the Monday concept thought that the concept was beneficial. Across-the-board, the participants who regarded Monday messaging and materials to be useful were more than those who thought otherwise. Compared to the standard CEASE, however, more participants in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group regarded Monday messaging to be useful. One participant commented:
Yes, they help[ed] me a lot … site coordinators We asked the site coordinators about their perception of the QSQM concept before explaining it to them and again after we explained it and shared its potential with them based on the evolving evidence. They shared their views, which included how they felt about the concept as well as how they thought it would apply to the participants from their study sites. Before explaining the QSQM concept to the site coordinators, they did not appear to fully understand or embrace the idea. One of them said:
Monday to everyone comes from the weekend. So, I think, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday, I think [are] better days. Another site coordinator suggested that rather than day of the week the day of the month would be more important for their residents for reasons she explained:
I think it does matter the timing of the month so I’m not really sure about the day but I will say the timing of the month so I would say the first week the first
1 3
through the fifth when people get their checks is not a great time because they’re out and about spending money and things like that I would say maybe the middle or towards the end of the month will be better because there’s not a lot of running about, more people are stable at that point in time and as far as like a day of the week I didn’t really see an issue with the day of the week. After we explained the background idea of the QSQM concept and shared with them its potential based on the evolving evidence, two of the site coordinators changed their views:
“I know that if you skip a Monday, you’re going to fail the rest of your week, if you start on a Monday, it’s like a forefront. That’s like the start of your week.” and “If I am like, relating it with like, my life, starting on a Monday does start your week out so that does make sense.”
However, knowing about the suggested benefits of the QSQM did not seem to impact the view of one site coordinator. As he/she said:
I will say it doesn’t matter. I’ll say if you have the will to start or stop anything, the day of the week doesn’t matter. peer motivators While the peer motivators seemed to be generally pleased with the QSQM material, there were suggestions on how to improve them as well:
The graphics were really nice. The tips were very helpful. said one peer motivator. Whereas another peer motivator indicated that he/she thought that some of the infographics were a little busy and said that he/she would prefer if they provided
“More information, without making [them]busy.” Also, “… More support with them, not just only on Mondays.”
In addition, one peer motivator suggested:
Engaging with the participants somehow in the morning rather than the afternoon, so that they will be able get an actual fresh Monday start. She noted that some participants were not ready to quit on a Monday, while some others were able to quit on a Monday. Therefore,
Automated text messages should be sent to encourage those who want to quit on a Monday. recommendations for future programs  participants Participants’ feedback and suggestions for future programs fell into the following major categories: provision of the program to other population groups such as younger age groups, use of digital platforms such as the Internet and social media, and having more frequent classes and longer sessions. Some participants said that they wished the program was available for other population groups. For instance, one participant said:
I was thinking if they could have it for the younger generation because a lot of kids, I’m looking at, working around here, are smoking unnecessarily. It’s the other cigarette (e-cigarette) that they smoke. Some participants thought that using the Internet, including social media, should be considered for future programs:
“… if you guys post something and notify me; I’m going to share it: I’m going to post on my page [on the social media] so that anybody that wants to quit smoking and then go to my page, they’re going to see this program.” “…web coach and the online websites would help a lot.”
Many participants indicated that they would prefer sessions to be held more frequently and of longer duration. “I think we’re having classes like once a week and that wasn’t enough; It should’ve been like maybe two days or three days [per week], … I love to see [my peer motivator] before next week, or I might pick up a cigarette” “…I think that we needed longer sessions and more classes.” peer motivators One peer motivator believed that the paperwork was overwhelming and repetitive and suggested working on ways to reduce the paperwork. Another “peer motivator” suggested shifting to digitized data collection in order to reduce the paperwork. One peer motivator suggested developing an app that would help participants to know the group rules and what to expect in the group, the peer motivator added:
…Using the conference calls was too much for some participants, has to be individual calls. 1 3 site coordinators We asked the site coordinators to share with us the areas of the program that they think would need to be modified and they spoke about the timing of the classes. One site coordinator said she would prefer that the sessions were held earlier during the day, she said:
So I think, if it could have been a little earlier during the day. That would be the only thing I'm upset, [apart from being upset] that the pandemic hit, would be the hours. If the hours were more during the day. integration of study findings from quantitative and qualitative results Overall, the qualitative findings revealed a good knowledge and awareness of the CEASE program by participants and site coordinators and participants had the desire and intention to quit smoking. In addition, there was a positive perception and general satisfaction of participants and study site coordinators with the program. Most participants, site coordinators and peer motivators found the QSQM concept relevant and useful. In the quantitative component, more participants in the Monday-enhanced CEASE arm were available for follow-up compared to the standard CEASE, which may suggest more engagement and retention in the program in the Monday-enhanced arm compared to the standard CEASE arm. In addition, even though it was not statistically significant due to the small sample size, more of the Monday-enhanced CEASE participants smoked fewer cigarettes or quit smoking at follow-up compared to the standard CEASE participants. The overall findings are suggestive of participants’ inclination to quit or cut down tobacco use. The COVID-19 pandemic and its associated lockdown constituted a major roadblock to the program, but the teams were able to work around the challenges to continue delivering the smoking cessation services. Site coordinators, peer motivators, and participants provided useful recommendations for future program delivery, including timing, use of virtual methods, and improved materials/messaging. discussion In this mixed-methods study, we explored the feasibility and effect of incorporating the QSQM concept into an existing CBPR tobacco cessation program on quitting outcomes among participants of a tobacco cessation program in a low-income setting. Quantitative study findings suggested that more participants in the Monday-enhanced group completed the program compared to the standard CEASE
group. For both the Monday-enhanced and standard CEASE groups combined, there was a reduction in the mean tobacco consumption per day while no significant difference in quit rate was observed between the two groups. Qualitative data suggested that the Monday-enhanced CEASE group participants expressed more motivation for quitting and more satisfaction with the program compared to standard CEASE participants. This was in line with the quantitative findings, which were indicative of more retention in the program by Monday-enhanced CEASE participants. The overall improvement in smoking cessation outcomes points to the relative effectiveness of the CEASE program for quitting or cutting down tobacco use. These findings are supportive of other studies that emphasized the effectiveness of CBPR in smoking cessation among diverse populations, especially low-income, underserved ethnic minority communities [23, 24, 37, 38]. Additionally, most participants expressed their satisfaction with the program. They indicated that they found the program very engaging and beneficial. Our qualitative findings support findings from other studies showing that participants are more comfortable and engaged in CBPR settings due to familiarity with the environment and trust [23, 37, 38]. In our study, participants spoke favorably of the social support they received from their fellow participants. Besides supporting one another in punctuality and attendance at the programs, they also held one another accountable concerning their quitting goals. When proactively encouraged, this type of informal peerto-peer social support might be relevant for increasing the involvement of participants in community-based programs. Previous studies have shown promising results of CEASE program in achieving smoking cessation results among hardto-reach low-income racial and ethnic minority populations by providing participants with social support, social networks, and social capital [23, 24, 39]. The study findings are suggestive of a higher participants’ follow-up rate and greater motivation for quitting/cutting down cigarette use in the Monday-enhanced CEASE group compared with the standard CEASE group. This finding, albeit modest, is noteworthy. This may suggest that the QSQM messages and materials can be applied as an option and may even boost tobacco use cessation programs for possible improved outcomes. A good proportion of the participants posited that the QSQM messages and materials and the prospect of starting afresh on Mondays, were very helpful and motivational. The use of temporal landmarks, such as the QSQM concept for health behavior change, is an emerging field of research with promising evidence [15, 16]. Some research indicate that behavioral interventions such as smoking cessation programs may benefit from taking advantage of specific days of the week when people show increased interest in health behavior change [16]. Public health practitioners and
1 3
researchers including tobacco cessation researchers could leverage this concept of a weekly clock for healthy contemplations to achieve positive health behavior modification. The QSQM concept has an added advantage when compared to yearly landmarks such as New Year or birthdays because it allows for a shorter turnaround time in the likely event of failing to achieve the set health behavior goals. The Mondayenhanced CEASE program was designed to fall on a Monday in order to take advantage of the concept of starting afresh at the beginning of every week. The Monday-enhanced CEASE program also included Monday motivational messages and check-ins. Not much research is available on the effectiveness of applying this Monday concept specifically in tobacco cessation programs. One clinical trial demonstrated an increased participant self-efficacy towards future smoking cessation following the QSQM programs [17]. Additional research, particularly randomized controlled trials, would be necessary to support this QSQM concept and encourage its use in smoking cessation programs. The promising findings shown in our study may contribute to the limited literature available on this topic. The findings should, however, be interpreted in light of the study limitations. strengths and limitations This program had several strengths, including leveraging on a well-established community-based smoking cessation program, namely, CEASE. Furthermore, the program was driven by peers, which contributed to participant engagement. Another strength of the program was the collaboration among various institutions/organizations resulting in multidisciplinary input from all partners and stakeholders. The limitations of the study included that the program coincided with the state of emergency declared due to the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in a statewide stay-athome order. As a result, in-person classes could no longer hold. To mitigate this limitation, group phone calls using a conference calling platform replaced in-person sessions. Participants were provided a number to call in during their class time and the group calls were facilitated by their peer motivators. The lack of face-to-face interactions was challenging for some participants and some participants experienced technical difficulties while connecting to the group calls. This challenge could have negatively impacted the overall smoking cessation outcomes. Another important limitation of this study was the small sample size since further enrollment into the program halted due to the emergence of the COVID-19 pandemic. Furthermore, of the 64 participants who attended the first session, only 38 (59.4%) were captured at follow-up. To balance this limitation, we added a robust qualitative component in
order to provide more depth in the understanding of the effects of the Monday-enhanced CEASE program. One limitation resulting from the randomization of sites into Monday-enhanced or Standard CEASE was that the only non-public housing site was different at baseline compared to the public housing sites, potentially resulting in a selection bias. The dropout rates were also the highest in this site and could be attributed to the fact that participants of that site were very mobile and not in a common residence like in public housing; therefore, it was harder to reach them during the pandemic. To minimize this limitation, peer motivators made several attempts to contact all participants who did not call into the classes. An additional limitation due to the COVID-19 pandemic was the inability to measure breath CO at follow-up and the reliance on participants’ self-report to categorize them into those who “quit” or “didn’t quit.” Some studies show, however, that self-reported smoking status may be fairly reliable for predicting actual smoking status [40, 41]. conclusion Findings from this mixed-methods study were suggestive of a potential effect of the Monday-enhanced CEASE program in improving engagement and willingness to quit smoking in underserved ethnic minority communities in Baltimore City.