Background: Entrepreneurship education has gained significant attention in engineering. This has led to the widespread development of engineering entrepreneurship programs (EEPs) that instill entrepreneurial skills and mindsets in engineering graduates. While research has documented the benefits of EEPs, there is a paucity of research examining differences among men and women on factors informing their participation in EEPs. The purpose of the study is to examine differences across men and women regarding the factors that influence their decision to participate in EEPs. Methodology: This study uses an interpretative, qualitative approach using 20 student interviews as the data source. The interview transcripts are analyzed to identify key emergent themes pertinent to the differences among men and women. Findings: The findings identify five themes that unpack the differences between men and women in regard with factors informing their participation in EEPs: entrepreneurial selfefficacy, entrepreneurial intent, venture and nonventure creation goals, subjective influence of peers, and instructional preferences. Conclusion: Factors informing participation in EEPs are nuanced in meanings across men and women. Administrators and practitioners may use the differing factors and their nuances to better design curricular, pedagogical, advising, and outreach aspects of EEPs to create equitable and inclusive environments for women. i. background W ITH increasing globalization and the exponentialgrowth of technology-fueled economies, the value, and demand for entrepreneurial skills in engineering graduates is becoming more evident [1]. As a result, expectations for engineers in the global economy has expanded from solely engaging in technical problem solving in their designated roles, to being an active participant in the entrepreneurial problem-identification process by leveraging ongoing technological advancements in the field [2]. Fueled by this need to develop entrepreneurially minded engineers,
Manuscript received 10 October 2021; revised 30 March 2022 and 14 June 2022; accepted 1 August 2022. Date of publication 13 October 2022; date of current version 7 April 2023. This work was supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant 1531533. This work involved human subjects or animals in its research. Approval of all ethical and experimental procedures and protocols was granted by the University of Michigan’s IRB. The author is with the School of Applied Engineering and Technology, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ 07102 USA (e-mail: pshekhar@njit.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TE.2022.3208524
several engineering entrepreneurship programs (EEPs) have been initiated across U.S. universities at the undergraduate level [3], [4]. Offered in a wide array of formats, these programs expose students to entrepreneurial content and training in research-based experiential learning environments through formal curricular and informal cocurricular programming [5], [6], [7]. For the purpose of this study, entrepreneurial skills are described as one’s ability to successfully perform different tasks associated with the entrepreneurial process, such as searching for opportunities, transforming the identified idea into a business plan, and gathering resources to launch a venture [8]. Ongoing research on the impact of EEPs continues to document its effectiveness and reiterate its importance in engineering education. This body of literature includes studies on assessment of student learning and entrepreneurial mindset [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], impact of EEPs on engineering students’ academic performance and retention [11], and students’ entrepreneurial intent and career choices [15]. For example, Ohland et al. [14] assessed EEP which engaged undergraduate students at NC State University. The researchers used a longitudinal assessment approach and reported that students who participated in the program had higher rates of persistence in engineering (70% versus 51%) and higher cumulative grade point averages (3.08 versus 2.83) when compared to a matched sample of students who did not participate in the program [14]. The researchers also reported a positive impact of participation on students’ self-reported teamwork and leadership skills, and preparedness for work. In another example, results from a multi-institutional study show that students’ confidence in their ability to perform different tasks associated with entrepreneurship was significantly higher among students who participated in entrepreneurship courses versus nonparticipant students [5]. While these studies provide valuable insights on different aspects of entrepreneurship programming, there is a paucity of precursory research examining factors that promote/diminish engineering students’ participation in EEPs; specifically, in regard with investigating differences across men and women. Considering the underrepresentation of women in STEM entrepreneurship [16], literature notes the importance of EEPs in building entrepreneurial skills and enhancing entrepreneurial career aspirations among women in STEM fields [17]. Furthermore, a systematic review of academic entrepreneurship literature notes that almost negligible research
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
has taken gender into account [18]. As a result, researchers have called for a gendered examination of entrepreneurial ecosystems, particularly in engineering technology fields [19]. It is noted that gender is a nonbinary construct [20]. However, this article scope focusses on men and women by examining the research question: what are the differences across men and women regarding the factors that influence their decision to participate in EEPs? As the growth in EEPs continues in undergraduate engineering education [21], it is argued that it is critical to develop EEPs that are inclusive and equitable to women. Entrepreneurship has traditionally been a male-majority field, and often the programmatic structure and practices, are rooted in masculine norms, and cultures. Examining differences across men and women allows for understanding minoritized populations’ perspectives (women in our case), and how they may or may not conform with the prevalent perspectives captured from men’s responses. Research-based understanding of factors informing student participation for men and women will assist in the thoughtful development and implementation of inclusive and equitable EEPs, by taking minoritized populations’ perspectives into account. Furthermore, the findings also provide important theoretical and research implications for the nascent but growing subfield of engineering entrepreneurship education [4]. ii. study methodology  a. data collection, participants, and settings The study followed a qualitative, interpretive approach using interviews as our data source. Interviews allow researchers to capture unobservable participant data and are useful when the intent of the study is to examine participants’ perspectives [22]. In this study, 20 interviews were conducted to examine engineering students’ perspectives in regard with their participation in EEPs. The interviews were primarily conducted by researcher 1 who is formally trained in engineering at undergraduate and master’s level, and engineering education research at the doctoral level. Researcher 1 does not have prior background or formal education in entrepreneurship. However, to better understand the entrepreneurial ecosystem, two steps were taken. First, researcher 1 interacted with administrators and faculty engaged in EEPs. Second, researcher 2 attended initial interviews which were led by researcher 1 but researcher 2 asked probing questions when needed. Researcher 2 is a faculty member involved in engineering entrepreneurship education and holds a doctoral degree in engineering, and master’s degree in business administration. Cumulatively, these two steps assisted in gathering contextualized student responses during the interview without biasing the interview process. For example, to initiate the interview, the students were asked about EEPs that they have engaged in. The knowledge of different EEP offerings gained through interactions with EEP faculty and administrators; and the presence of the second researcher allowed the first researcher to ask to follow up with probing questions. The interviews were approximately an hour in length. A semi-structured format was followed in which preplanned questions were asked in addition to cross-questioning to further probe participants’ responses [23]. The interview
protocol was informed by key constructs noted in the widely used theory in the entrepreneurship education literature (e.g., theory of planned behavior [24], social cognitive career theory [25], and Shapero’s entrepreneurial event theory [26]), and adult learning [27]. The systematic review conducted to identify the key theories and synthesize pertinent constructs is presented elsewhere [27]. Example constructs noted in these theories, and their descriptions are summarized in Table I. Interview questions gathered insights about the constructs. For example, for entrepreneurial self-efficacy (ESE), the participants were asked, what skills do you think you need to perform well in EEPs, and how did your confidence in these skills inform your decision to enroll or not enroll? Similarly, why did you enroll in EEPs, focused on entrepreneurial intent. The interview protocol also included generic questions that were not directly tied to the constructs, as presented in the following. 1) How and when did you learn about EEPs? 2) What were your prior experiences that motivated your
interest in EEPs? 3) What was the most challenging part of EEPs? 4) What types of teaching styles were you exposed to in
EEPs? What did you like or dislike about them? The 20 study participants were undergraduate engineering students at a research-intensive university located in the United States. The university’s entrepreneurial ecosystem can be described as a “hub” wherein the institution is strongly committed to furthering its mission in the area of engineering entrepreneurship education and offers a wide array of curricular and co-curricular programmatic offerings [28]. These EEP offerings collectively aim to train students to successfully translate their knowledge into real-world applications, and act on opportunities in their entrepreneurial endeavors. The EEPs focus on engineering-specific aspects, such as leveraging technology and experimentation, and aspects associated with the entrepreneurial process, such as opportunity recognition, risk management, relationship building, and perseverance. To achieve this purpose, the university offers a wide array of curricular EEPs (e.g., standalone courses and a minor in entrepreneurship) as well as co-curricular EEPs (e.g., workshops, trips to startups, pitch competitions, incubators, and accelerators). The participant sample included an equal number of self-identified men and women. In regard to race/ethnicity, there were three Asian/Asian–American, one Latinx/Hispanic, five White/Caucasian, and two mixed-ethnicity participants. Nine participants declined to report their race/ethnicity. To account for maximum variation sampling [29], the sample included students from different majors (3—computer science, 5—undeclared major, 2—computer, 4—mechanical, 3—industrial and operations, 1—biomedical, and 1—nuclear engineering); and undergraduate standing (6—first year, 4—sophomore, 4—junior, and 6—senior). Furthermore, the participant sample included students that have varied EEP experiences, such as standalone courses, minor in entrepreneurship, co-curricular entrepreneurship programming, and no experience with EEPs. b. data analysis approach The data analysis approach followed a three-step process: 1) first cycle coding; 2) second cycle coding; and 3) identification of key themes [30]. The first cycle coding involved developing an inventory based on codes emergent in the transcripts. Two researchers were engaged in the initial coding process. To establish interrater reliability, two researchers first independently coded one interview transcript which was followed by a detailed discussion to develop an initial coding inventory. It is to note that theoretical constructs were not used during the first cycle to mitigate theoretical bias in the initial coding process. An external researcher not involved in the project also independently coded the transcript to check for potential biases. Next, the two researchers coded two additional transcripts which was followed by another round of discussion to refine the coding inventory, and resolution of any discrepancies. The coding inventory produced after this
stage was used by the two researchers to analyze four additional transcripts. The initial agreement represented by an intraclass correlation of 0.88 between the two raters determined the interrater reliability. Remaining discrepancies were resolved through further discussion to reach a full agreement. The second cycle coding involved analytical categorization of the codes that emerged from the first cycle coding process. Pertinent theoretical constructs were used in the second cycle as applicable in the emergent data. For example, the construct of ESE, which is widely noted construct in the literature, was used to categorize first cycle codes that captured confidence in one’s ability to successfully perform different tasks. Two researchers jointly performed the categorization of the codes operationalized in the first cycle with feedback from another researcher serving as an external check to the categorization process. Finally, key themes recurring in the data were synthesized after multiple iterations to bring meaning to the findings in regard with the research questions [30], [31]. This process specifically focused on identifying key themes that differed across men and women participants’ responses. c. research quality To establish the “trustworthiness” of the qualitative findings, several recommended practices were followed to enhance the research quality of the study [27], [28], [29], [30]. The language of Walther, Sochacka, and Kellam (2013) is adopted to organize the steps for ensuring research quality, specifically in the context of making and handling the interview data as summarized in Table II. iii. findings and discussion The analysis of the qualitative interviews identified the differences between men and women in regard with their participation in EEPs. This section presents the key emergent differing themes between men and women’s responses: ESE, entrepreneurial intent, venture and nonventure creation goals, subjective influence of peers, and instructional preferences. In addition, this section provides a discussion on the practical and theoretical implications of the emergent findings by leveraging pertinent empirical and theoretical literature. Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy: ESE can be described as one’s perceived confidence in performing different entrepreneurship-related tasks in a successful manner [31], [32], [33]. The concept of ESE is rooted in the self-efficacy theory [34] and social cognitive career theory [35] which posit that self-efficacy shapes students’ academic interests and the types of activities they choose to engage in. Consistent with this literature, in the study findings, both men and women underscored the importance of ESE in one’s decision to enroll in the EEPs. However, differences were found between men and women students in their selfefficacy toward successfully performing entrepreneurial tasks involving communication and public speaking. The findings noted that overall men were confident in engaging in public speaking while engaging in various entrepreneurship-related activities, such as pitching and presenting ideas. Responding to the question about how confidence in skills needed to perform well in EEPs informed students’ decision to enroll in EEPs, one student expressed, “I think it depends on how much you believe in yourself as a public speaker but I think that would be fun to do that. Yeah, I think I would be good at it.” Specifically, reflecting on what makes the student enroll in the EEPs, a student who enrolled in EEPs said:
Usually, I can speak what I want to say, to whatever I want to say, and I just have a general, I would say I have a general inclination to just put stuff out there because better said than just walking around and not doing much. I think it would definitely make me more up to the decision. So, if I were presented with, oh this is a good course, do you have hesitation in enrolling in it? I’d probably say no, because I’m pretty confident in my ability to well in such a course. In contrast, while some women were confident, majority of the responses noted low ESE in regard with presenting and pitching ideas in public in spite of their participation in EEPs. For instance, commenting on the task of selling ideas or products to people, a student expressed, “Science and math I’m confident, but I’m not good at, I feel like I’m not good at selling things, which is something I see in my brother . . . I feel like I wouldn’t want to be the front, like, the face of whatever project, I would rather be doing something behind the scenes.” Another student expressed her low confidence and reported that she is getting better at it through engagement in the EEPs, she said “Decently confident. Getting more so. That’s actually a goal of mine. They’re starting to transition me into being able
to do these big design reviews and presentations and pitches. Working on it.”
In addition, men and women differed in ESE pertaining to the notion of “being an entrepreneur.” Women found working in an open-ended environment which involves putting your ideas others to judge as “scary.” This can be partly attributed to the platforms by which ideas are judged in EEPs such as pitch competitions, which are explicated and discussed in the instructional preferences section of this article. It is note that these responses were experienced primarily by women who participated in EEPs, and they reported it as one of the reasons why women may choose to not engage in EEPs. Overall, women found entrepreneurship as intimidating and noted it as a major deterrent for student participation, as expressed in this comment,
Before coming into any entrepreneurship thing, I was just like “oh, I’m not an entrepreneur. I don’t have a really great, innovative idea that’s going to change everything. I didn’t think of this by myself.” It’s intimidating, I think; the entrepreneurship idea. I think that’s maybe another reason that people don’t go for it, because it’s intimidating. In case of men, although some responses acknowledged that entrepreneurship can be intimidating, majority expressed high ESE in regard with aspects associated with an entrepreneur such as starting a company and working in an open-ended environment. For example, reflecting on why one would engage in EEPs, a student expressed, “It’s confidence that starting a company at least isn’t ruled out in your future plans. Maybe you won’t do it, maybe you will, but you haven’t ruled it out, and so you’re confident that you at least want to try, and then that’s why you enroll in the course.” In another example, when asked about influencers that informs one’s decision to engage in EEPs, a student reported confidence as the last factor, demonstrating that he held high ESE toward working in an open-ended environment, he said “Then last is the confidence, just because the confidence I feel like would have been the last, just because it was such an open environment that I wasn’t worried if I was confident or not. I wasn’t worried that I needed to develop confidence in it.”
These findings emphasize that administrators and practitioners should be cognizant of students’ ESE when designing and developing EEPs. Since individuals are likely to avoid tasks with low self-efficacy [36], women with low ESE might get intimidated by EEPs which will negatively impact their participation [37]. ESE has been widely studied in the entrepreneurship literature. Specifically, researchers have noted ESE as a precursor for entrepreneurial intent [32], [38] and also identified factors that may impact one’s ESE, such as past entrepreneurship-related experiences [33], [38], personality [39], [40], and experience with entrepreneurship programming [41]. In view of these studies, the presented findings implicate that administrators should be cautious in advertising that prior business experiences and/or skills are a prerequisite for succeeding in the EEPs. Rather, explicit emphasis that EEPs will assist in building these skills might serve as an effective recruitment and retention strategy for
women. Furthermore, administrators may choose to leverage noncurricular programs such as design teams to help students with low ESE get acclimatized to entrepreneurship in a lowstakes setting. Student-led extracurricular design experiences are noted to enhance students’ self-efficacy in innovation-related tasks [42]. Such participation experiences may also positively shape women’s confidence in succeeding, and encourage them to further participate in more formal curricular offerings. Entrepreneurial Intent: Entrepreneurial Intent or the intention to engage in entrepreneurial activities is a widely noted as a key driver of actual entrepreneurial engagement in theoretical [24] and empirical studies [43], [44]. In regard with entrepreneurial intent, two reasons were prominently noted in the responses explaining why students engage in EEPs. First, responses noted that students participated in EEPs because they intended to start a company or venture. Second, the other commonly noted reason was that students wanted to develop solutions to solve problems. While these two reasons were noted in both men and women’s responses, nuances were noted between men and women in regard with the second reason—why students wanted to solve problems. In case of men, EEPs provided an opportunity to work on open-ended problems which allowed them to learn different ways of problem solving and apply the learning in their future pursuits. Students reported that they perceived EEPs as a means for “innovating and problem solving, which can be applicable [in] any career” and beneficial in gaining a mindset to “attack problems in different ways.” In contrast, while women also perceived EEPs as a means to engage in developing innovative solutions to solve problems, the rationale behind the engagement were driven by their intention to bring positive changes in the world around them. For example, reflecting on her future career goals, a student expressed, “I don’t really have my future career prospects laid out super well right now, but I can definitely see using what I’ve learned in [EEPs] and, you know, my passion for trying to create global change.” Another echoed, “I see so many problems in the world. The reason I’m interested in entrepreneurship is to solve problems and to actually make this world a better place, or make it an easier place.”
Due to its origin in business fields, entrepreneurial intent is typically conceptualized and measured in regard with starting a company [45], [46]. Often studies use entrepreneurial intent as an outcome of program interventions and as metric to examine differences across men and women. Sole reliance on “venture-focused” entrepreneurial intent as an outcome or explanatory measure does not sufficiently capture “why” one intends to start a company. In the context of presented findings, this shows that typical entrepreneurial intent measures may place the aspects of “problem solving” on a secondary level—a trait characteristic of engineering profession [47]. Furthermore, this approach limits researchers from examining the underlying reasons behind problem solving or starting a company. The presented findings note that women perceived EEPs as a platform to have a positive impact on the world. Thus, it is plausible that without explicit emphasis, women may perceive entrepreneurial intent to be only associated with starting a “profit-centric” venture, which may hinder their participation in EEPs. In an excellent critique, Downey (2005) highlights
the importance of engineers becoming “problem definers” in addition to only being “problem solvers” [48]. While problem solving involves developing engineering solutions, the aspect of problem defining also involves the rationale and motivation behind the problem-solving process. In the study presented here, it was found that while men talked about attacking a problem, women offered their motivations behind engaging in the problem-solving process. Thus, entrepreneurship programming for engineers may place equal emphasis on problem solving and more importantly be inclusive of a diverse set of motivations in the “problem-defining” process. While men’s career decisions are driven by monetary or status gain, women tend to select based on the perceived social good of the career choice [49], [50]. Also, from a professional formation perspective, Downey (2005) recommends that integration of problem definition into engineering education will legitimize the “human dimensions of engineering work alongside technical problem solving” [48, p. 594]. Thus, providing opportunities for students to define problems that they solve in the entrepreneurial process, and ensuring that the pedagogical and curricular environments are structured to be inclusive to broader human dimensions and motivations may better serve women in academic entrepreneurship spaces. Furthermore, incorporating these changes in new or revising existing EEPs will provide women with avenues to engage in the entrepreneurial process that resonates with the feminist ethic of caring, and provide pathways to entrepreneurially solve societal issues rather than solely engaging in entrepreneurship from a stringent profit-centric worldview [51], [52], [53]. Finally, from a theoretical standpoint, intent holds a central position in theories frequently used in the entrepreneurship education literature [27], particularly when examining differences between men and women. However, if the construct and pertinent measurement instruments are defined from a “dominant” perspective, then such studies may yield biased results. Goals (Venture Creation or Nonventure Creation): The goal to pursue nonventure creation career paths emerged as a notable differing factor for participating in EEPs for women. While majority of men expressed that they engaged in EEPs to meet their goals of starting a company, women found EEPs as a medium for getting entrepreneurial training beneficial in meeting different career goals rather than only serving as a platform for students who are interesting in venture creation. Overall, women indicated that they engaged in EEPs because they wanted to go to industry or work in startups and felt that EEPs provided preprofessional preparation, exposure to business plan development, product branding and understand how the industry functions. For example, one student reported how that she wanted to work in a startup rather than start her own venture, she said, “I even think, thinking about it now, I don’t ever see myself as the starter, or the founder of a business. I see myself working for a startup.” Another expressed,
But I think females take them more because they’ve got a little bit of an interest, and then usually that grows. And then the males have usually have done their research, and have maybe. . . Actually, already
have an idea and want to use the classes as a platform to grow that, is what I’ve seen a lot of, actually. A lot of the men come in with their own ideas of what they want to do and start a business. And the females are there more to just get the education behind it and then maybe develop ideas later on. With the broader aim of engineering and other STEMfocused EEPs is to develop entrepreneurially minded graduates, it is important to encourage participation from a wider student population. It is highly likely that the number of students seeking to start their own company during their undergraduate education and immediately upon graduation will be significantly less than students interested in developing the skillsets. To cater to students who do not intend to create a venture in the short term, EEPs may place greater emphasis on experiences and skills that are also valuable in nonventure creation careers. More importantly, this should be accompanied with outreach efforts that advertise and disseminate this broader applicability of EEPs. In light of the study findings and recent engineering education literature [54], such efforts may assist in encouraging participation from a diverse group of students, women in particular. Subjective Influence of Peers: Subjective influence of peers was also a found as a key influencer informing students’ decision to engage or not engage in EEPs. In men’s responses, we found that gaining information and feedback about EEP offerings from peers informed students’ decision to participate. For instance, reflecting on how he learned about the EEP, one student expressed, “I only found out because one of my friends looked and said, “Oh dude, look they’re doing this right now and this looks like a really cool class.” I was like, “Yeah, cool. Let’s do it together.” And a couple of my friends went, we made a group, and built an app in that class.” Similarly, another student commented on how talking to peers provided him with information about a particular entrepreneurship course—“That one just stuck out to me the more I spoke to one of my friends who had also done both the classes and I was like talking to them. Based off my workload that semester and what the class was like, and how much work I’d have to do outside of class, that’s what I used to make my decision basically.”
In case of women, in addition to gaining information, the subjective approval provided by peers played a more “inspirational role” in informing their decision to engage in EEPs. Several students expressed that interacting with someone who has experienced the program served as role models, made them feel empowered and motivated, and reaffirmed that EEPs were the “right thing” for them. For example, commenting on the influence of peers on EEP participation, one student said, “Peers are better for people who are like, ‘Oh, that could be me, because, you know, you’re a student just like me. You’re an ME [Mechanical Engineering] student just like me.”’
Entrepreneurship literature extensively notes the importance and impact of role models among individuals. Specifically, role models can have positive impact on women’s entrepreneurial intent [55], entrepreneurial self-efficacy [38], and providing access to mentoring and resources by exposing individuals
to entrepreneurial networks [56]. Furthermore, in line with other research, the presented findings illustrate that role models can play a motivational role [57], [58] in individuals entrepreneurial pursuits as well as guide them in navigating entrepreneurial challenges [25]. In addition, recent renditions of expectancy value theory underscores that student’s intent and consequent engagement is often “situated” and influenced by socializers [59]. Thus, in regard with subjective influence of peers on women’s participation, administrators may pursue targeted outreach efforts (e.g., student organizations which engage women such as Society of Women Engineers) rather than generic approaches. In addition, within the existing programs, administrators may also choose to establish a peer/alumni network in which women who have undertaken EEPs engage with prospective students and share their experiences. This will facilitate opportunities for finding peer role-models, mentors, and community building among women. Furthermore, this may also assist in strengthening women’s ESE, an influencing factor noted previously in the findings. Instructional Preferences: Although there was overall positive feedback on student-centered instruction implemented in EEPs, several women expressed their discomfort with pitch competitions and noted it as a deterrent toward participation in EEPs. For example, a student noted that “a lot of people have a general phobia of public speaking and a fear of people criticizing their ideas once they’ve put them out there.” Another student said that she “felt threatened” by pitch competitions, while other and reported a lack of confidence in participating in pitch competitions: “I guess for me it was more like I would like to learn to be better at pitches and everything. I definitely envy girls that can stand up in front of a class full of boys and give a pitch or give a presentation confidently, which I guess might be something that deters girls from it too.” Finally, women students recalled their past negative experiences with in pitch competitions, as detailed in this student remark. Yeah, that course was really, especially just the how blunt and rash Professor [X] was in any feedback that we did get, which was pretty limited, about our presentation. Like I said, I thought that I was very good at presentation communication skills and intergroup communication skills, as well. He had very strong things to say about our team and our presentation and things like that. That was very disheartening at times because I haven’t had instructors... I’ve never felt like an instructor wanted me to fail, before. I know looking back he didn’t want us to fail. He was trying to do that to force us to realize that we’re. . . Things that we could address. He never thought that we were a complete failure. He just wanted us to realize that there were holes that we could fix and to show them, but that was very discouraging for a while. Based on these findings, one recommendation is for practitioners and administrators to be cautious of the impact of their instructional choices. There should be thoughtful appraisal of which instructional approaches to pursue rather than embed
varied activities associated with entrepreneurial practice which may act as a barrier to equitable participation. Instruction in EEPs is often designed to imitate the experiences of practicing entrepreneurs. As a result, EEPs extensively use several evidence-based instructional practices, such as project-based learning, experiential learning, and collaborative learning. In the presented study, although students held a positive outlook toward most of these instructional practices, several women reported that pitch competitions may discourage them from participating. Pitch competitions are a common part of entrepreneurial practice and are often embedded in EEPs. While pitch competitions might be intimidating for all students, it is important to point out that the atmosphere of pitch competitions in typical scenarios is male dominated as they are structured to value stereotypical traits which are societally devalued in women. In particular, operating within the masculine norms of entrepreneurship, “pitching” involves demonstrating aggressive and confrontational behaviors [60]. This may risk women to attribute their nonconformity with aggressiveness when pitching their ideas as a lack of selfefficacy to succeed in pitch competitions, particularly in scenarios where the ideas are pitched to mostly men. In fact, researchers have examined the effect of entrepreneur’s sex on pitch success and have found that investors preferred pitches from men over women despite the content of the pitch being same [61]. This calls for further examination of EEP pedagogy from a critical feminist lens [15] and the inherent biases associated with entrepreneurial practice. Driven by national calls [62], engineering education research has identified several effective evidence-based student-centered instructional practices and continues to increase their adoption in the classroom [63], [64], [65], [66]. While these efforts are important, researchers have noted the importance of consciously accounting for “power considerations” when using student-centered practices [67]. In the context of presented findings, pitch competitions provide an example of how despite being student centered, it may not be the most conducive pedagogical approach for recruiting and engaging women in entrepreneurship programming. Thus, when selecting pedagogical and assessment approaches to entrepreneurship programming, EEP administrators and faculty must be cognizant of the power differential that may be inherently embedded in different entrepreneurial practices that they are adopting from when creating experiential learning environments. iv. conclusion While research focused on entrepreneurship education in engineering fields is beginning to emerge, the majority of these studies have focused on assessing learning outcomes. Instead of examining the impact of EEPs, the presented study looks backwards into the antecedents for creating inclusive EEPs. Engineering education studies strongly suggest that entrepreneurship education positively impacts students’ learning and outcomes. These results and national calls for more entrepreneurial graduates reiterate that more students should be encouraged to participate in EEPs. The study findings contribute to building a better understanding of differences
between men and women in regard with factors informing their participation in noncompulsory EEPs. It is noted that the study was conducted at a large, research university which offered a wide range of curricular and co-curricular entrepreneurship programming. Thus, the direct transferability of the findings to other institutional contexts should be applied with caution, particularly at relatively smaller institutions and/or those with limited EEP offerings. Nonetheless, the study findings provide timely implications informing the development of new or revisiting existing EEPs that may foster greater participation from women. With the continued growth of EEPs in engineering education, the study findings provide grounding for researchers to examine student participation in EEPs in other institutional contexts, and develop evidence-based implications that are transferable to wider institutional contexts and academic entrepreneurial ecosystems. Overall, the emergent findings reiterate that more theoretical and research attention should be devoted toward examining curricular, pedagogical, advising, and outreach aspects of entrepreneurship programming for engineering students. v. limitations While the choice of qualitative methods in this exploratory work provides in-depth insights, the limitations of the presented study provides several avenues for future research and investigation. First, the study presented here was limited to 20 students at a large, research-focused institution, restricting the transferability of the findings to other institutional contexts. Although it is obvious that students from different backgrounds will differ in their reasons for participation in EEPs, engineering education studies focused on such examinations are scarce. In this research, contextual perspectives have the potential to reveal deeper insights as opposed to opposed to sole emphasis on individual differences [68]. 