We report the first-ever complete measurement of MAOStress material functions, which reveal that stress can be more fundamental than strain or strain rate for understanding linearity limits as a function of Deborah number. The material used is a canonical viscoelastic liquid with a single dominant relaxation time: Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) polymer solution crosslinked with tetrahydroborate (Borax) solution. We outline experimental limit lines and their dependence on geometry and test conditions. These MAOStress measurements enable us to observe the frequency dependence of the weakly nonlinear deviation as a function of stress amplitude. The observed features of MAOStress material functions are distinctly simpler than MAOStrain, where the frequency dependence is much more dramatic. The strain-stiffening transient network model (SSTNM) was used to derive a modelinformed normalization of the nonlinear material functions that accounts for their scaling with the linear material properties. Moreover, we compare the frequency-dependence of the critical stress, strain, and strain-rate for the linearity limit, which are rigorously computed from the MAOStress and MAOStrain material functions. While critical strain and strain-rate change by orders of magnitude throughout the Deborah number range, the critical stress changes by a factor of about two, showing that stress is a more fundamental measure of nonlinearity strength. This work extends the experimental accessibility of the weakly nonlinear regime to stress-controlled instruments and deformations, which reveal material physics beyond linear viscoelasticity but at conditions that are accessible to theory and detailed simulation. ii. materials and methods  a. mathematical framework In simple shear deformation, the time-periodic strain response to an oscillatory shear stress, represented as σ(t) = σ0 cosωt for convenience37, can be written as a Fourier expansion in terms of the odd harmonics1,37, in addition to a baseline strain γ̄
γ(t;σ0,ω) = γ̄(σ0,ω)+ ∑ n,odd
γ ′n(σ0,ω)cosnωt + γ ′′ n (σ0,ω)sinnωt, (3)
where γ ′n and γ ′′n are the nth elastic and viscous strain harmonics, respectively. For sufficiently small amplitudes, the strain behaves linearly, where only the first harmonics, γ ′1 and γ ′′ 1 , are required to describe the response, and these harmonics scale linearly with stress amplitude. In this limit of σ0 → 0, referred to as small-amplitude oscillatory shear (SAOS), the stress-independent linear elastic compliance J′(ω) = γ ′1/σ0 and linear viscous compliance J ′′(ω) = γ ′′1 /σ0 (or fluidity φ ′ = J′′ω) capture the frequency-dependence of the viscoelastic behavior. However, as the amplitude increases, the linearity with stress amplitude is broken by the emergence of higher harmonics and changes to the now amplitude-dependent first harmonics. One common assumption is that these
co-sinusoidal input signal. The directly measurable quantities are torque M(t) and angular displacement θ(t), which are proportional to stress (σ(t) = 2πR3 M(t)) and strain (γ(t) = 1 tanα θ(t)) respectively, where R and α are the radius and angle of the cone, respectively. (d) The measured strain waveform will deviate
from the ideal sinusoidal shape at increasing stress amplitude σ0. Discrete Fourier transform are used to identify the strain harmonics {γ ′1,γ ′′1 ,γ ′3,γ ′′3 } (Eq. 3) at every amplitude, which are fit to Eq. 4 to find the MAOStress material functions at each frequency. All scale bars are 1 cm. harmonics can be expanded as a function of the stress amplitude σ0 using an integer power series, which applies to many materials. Nevertheless, some materials have shown non-integer power expansions17,38, which can be predicted from physical models such as Hertzian particle contact38. However, since previous experimental observations of PVA-Borax showed that an integer power series expansion works for that material, we expand the strain harmonics as integer powers. In the first deviation from linearity, only the first and third harmonics are present12, and the first and third
strain harmonics up to the first deviation are expanded as
γ ′1(σ0,ω) = J ′σ0+ [c1]σ30 +O(σ 5 0 ) (4a) γ ′′1 (σ0,ω) = J ′′σ0+
[ f1] ω σ30 +O(σ 5 0 ) (4b)
γ ′3(σ0,ω) = [c3]σ 3 0 +O(σ 5 0 ) (4c) γ ′′3 (σ0,ω) = [ f3] 3ω σ30 +O(σ 5 0 ). (4d)
The first-harmonic intrinsic nonlinearities, [c1] and [ f1], quantify the degree to which changes in the first harmonics occur as the stress amplitude increases, causing intracycle changes in the material response. The sign of these material functions determines whether softening, stiffening, thinning, or thickening occurs as amplitude increases. The third harmonic intrinsic nonlinearities [c3] and [ f3] quantify the leading-order growth of the third harmonics of strain, causing increased distortion in the Lissajous curves. b. experimental protocol The stress-controlled oscillatory amplitude sweeps were conducted on the MCR 702 rotational rheometer in combined motor transducer mode. Care was taken to avoid experimental limitations39. We used a cone and plate geometry (d = 25 mm, α = 4◦) to ensure homogeneous stress and strain distribution within the sample. The temperature was controlled using a bottom Peltier plate at 25◦C. After loading, the sample was coated with a thin layer of silicone oil (100 cst, Sigma Aldrich) at the edge of the gap to prevent water evaporation from the sample. The material functions were extracted at every frequency by fitting the stress amplitude sweeps to Eqs. 4(a)-(d). The maximum stress amplitude tested has to be high enough to resolve the MAOS regime experimentally. However, it is preferred to avoid high stresses beyond the MAOS regime, which may cause irreversible changes to the material. This allows us to use the same sample to test multiple frequencies, simplifying the experimental protocol. Hence, several pretests were run to find the maximum stress amplitude we can reach at every frequency without causing irreversible change by comparing the linear viscoelastic frequency sweep before and after the sweep. This maximum amplitude and the minimum amplitude required to resolve the MAOS regime experimentally vary as a function of frequency. Therefore, a different stress range is set at each frequency. Moreover, the time required to complete the sweeps at the low frequency can
exceed 24 hours, which puts the sample at risk of evaporation despite usingcone oil. For this reason, multiple loadings were used to test the entire frequency range. The full frequency range (ω = [0.1− 100]rad/s) was tested in three different loadings. We used σ0 = [1− 300]Pa for ω = [0.1− 1]rad/s, σ0 = [1− 500]Pa for ω = [1.0− 10.0]rad/s, and σ0 = [1−1000]Pa for ω = [10.0−100.0]rad/s. Moreover, we used 50 points per decade of stress amplitude σ0 to get good resolution and to ensure that the steps in stress amplitude are small, such that the equilibration time from one amplitude to the other is low. (a) Amplitude Sweep (b) MAOS Deviation
A custom Python code is used to process the stress and strain waveforms at every amplitude and frequency using a discrete Fourier transform to extract the strain harmonics {γ ′1, γ ′′1 , γ ′3, γ ′′3 }(σ0,ω). The amplitude sweeps of the first-harmonic compliances (J′1 and J ′′ 1 ) can be used to identify the overall response of the material to the applied stress. An amplitude sweep for PVA-Borax is shown in Fig. 3 at ω = 5 rad/s. The decrease in compliances at increasing amplitudes highlights these networks’ stiffening and thickening nature. While the linear compliances can be extracted from the first-harmonic compliances sweep, the intrinsic nonlinear coefficients are computed by isolating the nonlinear deviations as shown in Fig. 3b. The linear term can be subtracted from the elastic first-harmonic in Eq. 4a to isolate the weakly nonlinear term. At every frequency, the four weakly nonlinear deviations ({γ ′1, γ ′′1 , γ ′3, γ ′′3 }(σ0,ω)) are fit to Eq. 4 to extract the MAOStress material
functions J′, J′′, [c1], [c3], [ f1], and [ f3]. The range of the fit was restricted to the experimental MAOS regime, which is lower bounded by the noise floor and upper bounded by the higher order terms (>σ30 ). Quantifying weak deviations is non-trivial, and we fully document the fits and the corresponding ranges in the Supplementary Information (SI). Experimental limits39 for the measured harmonics and compliances are useful to determine the accessible experimental window. From the primary observables of torque and rotational displacement, the window is set by the low torque limit Mmin
σmin = Fσ Mmin, (5)
the high torque limit Mmax
σmax = Fσ Mmax, (6)
and the minimum displacement limit θmin
γmin = Fγθmin (7)
of the instrument. For a cone and plate geometry, Fσ = 2πR3 and Fγ = 1 tanα , where R is the radius of the geometry and α is the degree of the cone. The minimum measurable compliance can be inferred from the minimum strain as Jmin = γmin/σ0. Figure 4 demonstrates how the experimental limits can be used to identify the theoretically accessible MAOStress experimental window of the instrument, e.g., based on the manufacturer specifications shown in Table I. The predicted lowdisplacement limit is only an order of magnitude higher than the measured limit of γmin = 10−5. Moreover, the weakly nonlinear deviation characterized by the slope of 3 for the third harmonics in Fig. 4 can be significantly below the high-torque limit of the instrument. Despite that, the predicted low-torque limit is σmin = 10−2 Pa, and the raw waveforms were found to be noisy below σ0 = 10 Pa. Therefore, the low-stress limit from Eq. 5 may not directly translate to the stress amplitude that can be measured. One possible explanation is that the torque is controlled in steps much smaller than the stress amplitude during an oscillatory test. For example, for the 512 points per cycle used, the minimum stress change between successive points can be found at the peak of the oscillatory wave. It can be estimated as ∆σminσ0 = |cos(0)− cos(∆tω)|, where ∆tω = 2π/512 for a fixed time interval between points. Therefore, the minimum stress amplitude that can be controlled should be σ0,min = ∆σmin1−cos(2π/512) ≈ Fσ Mmax 7∗10−5 = 4 Pa for the geometry used in this work. This value provides a good starting point for experimental design, where the difference between the predicted (4 Pa) and actual (around 10 Pa from Fig. 4) low-stress limit is around a factor of 2 and can be due to ambient noise. c. material preparation The PVA-Borax sample in this work contains 2.75 wt% Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) aqueous solution physically crosslinked with 1.25 wt% Sodium tetraborate (Borax). The concentration was selected following the work of Bharadwaj et al.15. The sample was prepared as follows: 4wt% PVA (Sigma-Aldrich, 99% hydrolyzed, Mw = 85,000-110,000) was dissolved in DI water at 80◦C overnight until a homogeneous transparent solution was obtained. Similarly, 4wt% Borax (SigmaAldrich) solution was prepared by dissolving Borax in DI water. After the stock solutions cooled down to room temperature, the two solutions were mixed (27.5 PVA:12.5 Borax by solution mass) to prepare 2.75wt% PVA- 1.25wt% Borax solution. Air bubbles trapped during the mixing were
removed by centrifuging. Protorheology36, shown in Fig. 2(b), reveals that this PVA-Borax composition behaves as a viscoelastic liquid with a finite flow viscosity η , observable elasticity, and relaxation time τ . Viscous flow is revealed by the time-lapse images, with observable flow on the order of tens of seconds and proceeding for 300 s in the images. A quantitative estimate of viscosity can be made by considering the radial evolution between t = 0 s and t = 180 s, assuming a viscous gravity current with steady viscous flow and negligible surface tension, as η = 0.0195ρg∆t h 3 2(3R 2 2+h 2 2) 3
R82−R81 where ρ
is density, ∆t is elapsed time, h2 is final height and R1, R2 are the initial and final radius, respectively. The t = 300 s frame was not considered because surface tension effects may compete with the viscous effects at that low height, and only viscosity and gravity were considered in the protorheology analysis. From Fig. 2(b), we have R1 = 1.6 cm, R2 = 2.5 cm and h2 = 1.1 cm and using ρ = 103 kg/m3 and g = 9.8 N/kg, we obtained η ≈ 2000 Pa.s at a characteristic stress of σgrav ≈ 220 Pa and observation time of tobs = 180 s. This stress, as will be shown below, is within the weakly-nonlinear regime, which suffices in providing an approximation of the zero-frequency fluidity φ0 ≈ 1η = 5× 10−4 (Pa.s)−1, which is within an order of magnitude of the measured φ0. The elastic behavior of PVA-Borax is indicated by the bounce test in Fig. 2(b) which shows elasticity at short times on the order of tens of milliseconds and a small loss factor tanδ = G′′/G′ < 1 at these bouncing conditions, where tanδ can be quantitatively estimated from tanδ = 1π ln( 1 f ), where f = hreb/hdrop is the recovered height fraction. From Fig. 2(b) we have f = 0.38 which gives tanδ ≈ 0.3 (corresponding to ω = π/∆t ≈ 157 rad/s where ∆t ≈ 20 ms) at a characteristic stress of σ ≈ 210 Pa. The relaxation time τ is quantitatively bounded from these observations, being between the bouncing and time-lapse time scales, i.e., greater than 20 ms and less than 15 s. The protorheology observations are consistent with the linear viscoelastic frequency sweeps in Fig. 1 and provide compelling visual interpretations of key features therein. The images in Fig. 2(b) do not indicate the nature of the nonlinearity, which will be revealed by precision rheometry. iii. results Stress amplitude sweeps of PVA-Borax were conducted in the frequency range of [0.1-100 rad/s], and the resulting first and third strain harmonics are shown in Fig. 5 for frequencies of ω = [0.1,1,10,39.8] rad/s. The first-harmonic compliances exhibited a typical linear regime
plateau, followed by a slight decrease due to the stress-stiffening nature of the material. The slight decrease in compliance led to orders of magnitude growth in the weakly nonlinear deviations of the first harmonics. These deviations were computed by subtracting the linear contributions, calculated as J′σ0 and J′′σ0 for the elastic and viscous first harmonics. The fit lines in Fig. 5(c)-(f) demonstrate that the first and third-harmonic deviations grew closely to σ30 , consistent with the theory and measurements of the weakly nonlinear deviations in MAOStrain. The material functions associated with the fit lines were extracted as described in the methods section, and the fits for all the frequencies are shown in the SI (Figs.S2-S32). The observable deviations grow after a certain amplitude where the signal exceeds the noise floor. This noise was above the value predicted from the instrument limits using eq. 7. Furthermore, the noise floor increased with the experimental frequency. These observations can be explained by external factors, such as ambient noise, instrument state, and sample loading, that are difficult to predict a priori and are not accounted for by instrument calibration. Nonetheless, the minimum observable strain amplitude achieved was remarkably low (< 10−5) and was enough to extract the MAOStress material functions. The frequency-dependent behavior of the extracted linear elastic compliance J′ and viscous fluidity φ ′ = J′′ω is presented in Fig. 6. The LVE behavior of PVA-Borax is nearly Maxwellian but deviates from a single-mode Maxwell model due to its distribution of relaxation times, which was captured by a continuous Lognormal distribution (Appendix A). The mean relaxation time τ0 = 0.402s, dispersity index Ð= 2.54, and elastic compliance plateau J0 = 1G0 = 0.9×10 −3Pa−1 were extracted from the moments of the distribution following the work of Martinetti et al40. The relaxation time τ0 was chosen as the mean relaxation time of the modulus-weighted spectrum Q(τ) = H(τ)τ (i.e., first-moment average in terms of Gi of a discrete spectrum) and can be related to the plateau modulus G0 and steady-state linear viscosity η0 as τ0 = (η0 −ηs)/G0 = η0/G0, since the solvent viscosity ηs is neglected here. The viscous compliance J′′ at the high frequencies (ω > 60 rad/s) is noisy, because it is the sub-dominant compliance component (tanδ < 0.1)41. This caused the fits to have an unsatisfactory adjusted coefficient of determination R2ad j (documented in the SI, Fig. S1) associated with the goodness of fit, and therefore the corresponding material functions are omitted from the results. The frequency-dependent MAOStress material functions are reported in Fig. 7(a-d). The sign of the material functions is indicated by whether the symbol is filled (positive) or not (negative). The negative sign of the first-harmonic material functions [c1] and [ f1] shows that PVA-Borax stiffens and thickens with increasing stress across all the tested frequencies. The value of the
normalized material function can be used to compare to models or other material formulations to fit model parameters or establish benchmarks for desired nonlinearity in different applications. The material functions are normalized to represent the relative strength of the nonlinearity to the linear component, which will be further discussed below. The magnitude of [c1] decreases as a function of frequency, which shows that the stress-stiffening nonlinearity decreases in the elastic limit (high frequencies). On the other hand, the viscous nonlinearity is constant at the lower frequencies until ω = 10 rad/s, at which point a sharp decrease is observed, showing that the viscous thickening is weak in the elastic limit. Another reason behind this drop could be the difficulty of measurement because the viscous component is subdominant, as discussed above. The same material’s MAOStrain results are unaffected at those frequencies (Fig. 7), which could be due to optimized control for oscillatory strain in commercial instruments compared to oscillatory stress. Third harmonics are associated with the distortion of Lissajous curves12,34,42. The sign of the third harmonics determines the concavity of the strain-stress Lissajous curves (fifth harmonics and higher also contribute, but these are negligible with the weakly nonlinear MAOStress). Third harmonics are best interpreted in the context of the first-harmonic deviations12. A negative value of [c3] and [ f3] means that within an oscillation cycle in the weakly nonlinear limit, the elastic and viscous compliance of the material decreases with stress and that the degree at which this decrease occurs increases with the stress amplitude (material is stiffer/thicker at higher stress). Combining this intracycle change indicated by [c3] and [ f3] with the observed intercycle stiffening and thickening at increasing amplitudes, as indicated by the signs of [c1] and [ f1], we can deduce that the stiffening occurs due to increased stress and not stress rates (following Fig. 7 in Ewoldt and Bharadwaj12). The positive sign of c3 for ω > 10rad/s suggests that the stiffening happens in that range primarily due to large stress rates and not stress itself. The ratio of the [c3] to [c1] and [ f3] to [ f1] is comparable to model predictions from the SSTNM model (≈ 0.3) as derived in the SI. More about the mathematics behind the sign and magnitude interpretation of the intrinsic MAOS material functions can be found in prior work from our group12. as a function of frequency (both would be constant for a single-mode Maxwell model). The lognormal spectrum fit (Fig. A1) is used to compute the elastic plateau modulus G0N = 1060 Pa and average timescale τ0 = 0.402 s from which the elastic compliance J0 = 1G0N = 9.43× 10−4 (Pa)−1 and infinite time fluidity φ0 = 1G0Nτ0 = 2.35×10−3 (Pa.s)−1 are computed. iv. discussion  a. normalization of maostress functions The choice of normalization in Fig. 7 was based on the scaling observed in the Strain-Stiffening Transient Network Model (SSTNM)15,43 and the time-strain separable MAOS model44. Even though they are independent, the linear and nonlinear MAOStress material functions may all scale with a measure of the linear elastic compliance J0 or fluidity φ0. Similar behavior is observed in
MAOStrain, where for many constitutive models, the linear and nonlinear material functions scale with G0 and η0. These scalings emerge from the physics that underlies the behavior of the material. The SSTNM model was developed by Bharadwaj et al. in 2017 to model the strain-stiffening MAOS behavior of PVA-Borax, where none of the existing nonlinear viscoelastic models was able to capture the behavior of this material15. We solved the SSTNM model numerically in stress control mode (computational details in Appendix B), which yields the normalization used in Fig. 7 using J0 and φ0. The results were corroborated by applying the Lennon et al.18 interrelations to the analytical solution15 of the MAOStrain material functions of the SSTNM model to convert to MAOStress functions. Moreover, applying the same relations to the time-strain separable MAOS models with a single-mode relaxation kernel yields the same scaling relationship (derived in Appendix B Eqs. 31). The MAOS time-strain separable (TSS) models are a generic category for which time-strain separability holds and where the damping function is expanded up to only the first deviation from linearity44. These findings suggest that the chosen normalization in Fig. 7 is suitable for comparing data from different materials as it provides a measure of nonlinearity independent from the linear compliance and fluidity for various models of nonlinear viscoelasticity. Other choices of MAOStress normalization are possible and can be derived by examining Eqn 4 but will have different physical interpretations as summarized in Table II. The unnormalized material functions (e.g., [c1]) quantify the rate at which the absolute nonlinear deviation (e.g., [c1]σ30 ) grows per unit of σ30 . However, when comparing different materials, the ratio of the deviation to the linear term at each frequency may be more relevant. Therefore, another choice to normalize is, e.g., [c1]J′ (ω) (similar normalization for the other material functions shown in Table II), which quantifies the rate at which the magnitude of the ratio [c1]σ 3 0
J′1σ0 = [c1]σ20 J′1 grows per unit of σ20 . Ex-
amining the ratio [c1]σ 2 0
J′1 provides an interpretation of the scaling inferred from the SSTNM and
MAOS TSS models and helps rationalize why [c1] may scale with J30 . For a single-mode SSTNM model, J′(ω) = J0, and the stress amplitude σ0 is to first-order proportional to G0 = 1/J0 for any particular strain. Hence, the relative nonlinearity [c1]σ 2 0
J′ suggests and justifies the simpler model-
informed scaling [c1]/J30 , interpreted as a measure of relative nonlinearity at a strain of order one (γ ≈ σ0J′ = σ0J0 = 1 in this case). Similar reasoning for fluidity results in, e.g. [ f1]/(J20 φ0), as shown in Table II. The model-informed [c1]/J30 normalization was reasoned from a single relaxation mode. However, PVA-Borax is better described by a distribution of relaxation times, in which case J0 can be
replaced with J′ and φ0 with φ ′ (as in Table II (multi-mode)) to have an analogous interpretation at different frequencies. Comparing the frequency dependence of [c1] J30 and [c1]J′3 in Fig. A4 shows that the latter normalization varies less with frequency achieving a constant plateau for ω > 0.3 rad/s. This observation indicates that incorporating the frequency dependence of the linear material functions in the normalization helps reduce the complexity of the MAOStress description, which shows a near-constant relative nonlinearity as a function of frequency. This observation is remarkable and is associated with a weak frequency dependence of the critical stress amplitude, as we explore in detail below. b. defining a threshold-independent critical forcing amplitude The emergence of nonlinearities is gradual, and the choice of where the linear regime ends is arbitrary, e.g., depending on a specified threshold, say, ε . For example, Pearson and Rochehfort reported one of the earliest experimental measurements of a frequency-dependent critical strain γcrit(ω) in 198232, using the deviation of first-harmonic oscillatory measures. They defined the
elastic critical strain at ∣∣G′1−G′ G′ ∣∣= 5% and the viscous critical strain at ∣∣G′′1−G′′G′′ ∣∣= 5%, where G′1 = σ ′1/γ0 and G ′′ 1 = σ ′′ 1 /γ0 (the stress harmonics σ ′ 1 and σ ′′ 1 are defined in Appendix C below). The resulting values of γcrit naturally depend on the choice of ε , and therefore the shape of γcrit(ω) may also depend on the chosen ε . MAOS enables a rigorous and threshold-independent study of the frequency dependence of the linearity limits σcrit(ω), γcrit(ω), and γ̇crit(ω). Ewoldt and Bharadwaj used MAOStrain material functions as a rigorous way to define linearity limit lines12 where the choice of ε is transparent. MAOS linearity limits directly compare the weakly nonlinear terms in the expansion to linear terms, providing a quantitative measure of nonlinear emergence and, as we show here, a critical forcing strength (strain, strain-rate, or stress) can be defined independent of the chosen threshold. The functions σcrit(ω), γcrit(ω), and γ̇crit(ω) can be interpreted as regime boundaries in Pipkin maps. The Pipkin map was initially proposed in 1972 as a tool to map the behavior of complex fluids based on two key parameters: timescale (frequency) and forcing amplitude27. The timescale dependence in a Pipkin map is commonly captured by the Deborah number De ≡ ωτ or De ≡ τ/t, where τ is a characteristic relaxation time of the material, ω is the forcing frequency, and t is a characteristic time scale of the forcing. The Pipkin map has proven to be a valuable means of mapping rheometric conditions to application conditions, identifying regimes of applicability of constitutive models, and comparing the behavior of complex fluids45–47. Notably, Pipkin did not specify a particular measure of the forcing amplitude, leaving it open for interpretation. Commonly used measures include strain amplitude and the strain-rate amplitude (or Weissenberg number, sometimes written as Wi≡ γ̇τ)12,28,29,47. In the case of strain amplitude, γcrit(De), the linearity limit line for a viscoelastic fluid exhibits a critical strain that diverges as the Deborah number (De) approaches zero according to the general theory of simple fluids by Coleman and Noll48,49. Conversely, when using strain rate or the Weissenberg number, Wicrit(De), the linearity limit line tends to approach a constant value in the viscous limit and diverges to infinity in the elastic limit. The frequency-dependent linearity limit based on stress, σcirt(ω), has not been previously predicted or measured, and MAOStress offers an effective means of experimental and numerical exploration. In this work, we use the MAOStress material functions to compute critical stresses for nonlinearity σcrit based on the four independent material functions. Setting the ratio of the elastic and viscous weakly nonlinear deviations [c1]σ30 and [ f1] ω σ 3 0 to the corresponding linear terms J′σ0 and J′′σ0 to an as-yet-unspecified threshold ε , we can define critical stresses based on the
first-harmonic nonlinearities as:
[c1]σ3crit J′σcrit = ε ⇒ σcrit,[c1](ω)√ ε =
√ J′
[c1] (8a)
[ f1]σ3crit J′′ωσcrit = ε ⇒ σcrit,[ f1](ω)√ ε =
√ φ ′
[ f1] . (8b)
Similarly, for the third harmonics, we set the ratio of the elastic and viscous weakly nonlinear deviations [c3]σ30 and [ f3] 3ω σ 3 0 to the corresponding linear terms J ′σ0 and J′′σ0 to the threshold ε to obtain:
[c3]σ3crit J′σcrit = ε ⇒ σcrit,[c3](ω)√ε = √ J′ [c3]
(9a)
[ f3]σ3crit 3J′′ωσcrit = ε ⇒ σcrit,[ f3](ω)√ε = √ 3φ ′ [ f3] . (9b)
Note that we keep ε on the left-hand side of Eqs. 8–9, thereby creating new definitions for critical forcing amplitudes that incorporate arbitrary threshold ε . That is, the threshold ε can be unspecified (since it can be arbitrarily large or small, based on the intention of application), allowing for comparison of critical forcing strengths independent of the choice of ε . For example, choosing ε = 10% rather than ε = 0.1% will increase the critical stress by 10. However, reporting the ratio σcrit/ √ ε will allow for comparison between different works, where a specific critical value can be calculated for any threshold desired. This applies to other measures of nonlinearity, such as strain and strain rate.  we acknowledge that it strictly applies for asymptotic deviation from the linear limit theory where higher order terms can be neglected. Figure 8 shows how each critical stress depends on Deborah number by applying Eqs.8–9 to the data in Fig. 7. The resulting lines represent potential boundaries of the linear regime on a Pipkin map constructed using stress to measure the nonlinearity strength. Stress values below the line are within the linear regime to within a deviation threshold ε of each MAOStress metric. The results show that the MAOStress first-harmonic has the lowest critical stress and is, therefore, the
first to reach a nonlinearity threshold, also observed in the amplitude sweeps shown in Fig. 5. Moreover, the first harmonics have a weak frequency dependence compared to the more complex dependence exhibited by strain and strain rate first harmonics, as shown in Appendix C (Fig. A6). A peak occurs at 10 rad/s for the third harmonics, concurrent with the sign change in [c3] and drop in [ f3]. The results in Fig. 8 reveal that the MAOStress behavior of this PVA-Borax formulation was accessible because the stress required to measure the nonlinear material functions was in an accessible range of stress within the limits of the instrument (and that did not cause irreversible changes to the material). c. pipkin map linearity limits: stress, strain, or strain-rate This section will compare the Pipkin map regime boundary of the linear regime when either stress, strain, or strain rate is considered. To facilitate this comparison, we derived a single critical stress instead of four values from the different material functions. One viable approach is to choose
the minimum of the four independent critical stresses defined in Eqs. 8 and 9. The drawback of this approach is that the critical stress linearity limit line will be noisy as the criteria shift between different metrics. To resolve this issue, we define a single critical stress based on the first harmonics by finding the stress at which the magnitude of the total first-harmonic deviation exceeds a threshold in comparison to the magnitude of the linear first-harmonic complex compliance√ ([c1]σ3crit)2 +( [ f1] ω σ 3 crit)
2√ (J′σcrit)2 +(J′′σcrit)2 = ε ⇒ σcrit,1(ω)√ ε = √√√√√ |J∗|√ ([c1])2 + ( [ f1] ω
)2 . (11) σcrit,1 is the stress at which the first-harmonic deviations affect both the observed elastic and viscous Lissajous curves, particularly in terms of the rotation and enclosed area. Moreover, we define σcrit,3 as the critical stress at which the magnitude of the total third harmonic deviation exceeds a threshold with respect to the magnitude of the to the magnitude of the linear firstharmonic complex compliance√ ([c3]σ3crit)2 +( [ f3] 3ω σ 3 crit)
2√ (J′σcrit)2 +(J′′σcrit)2 = ε ⇒ σcrit,3(ω)√ ε = √√√√√ |J∗|√ ([c3])2 + ( [ f3] 3ω
)2 . (12) σcrit,3 is the stress at which the third-harmonic deviations affect both the observed elastic and viscous Lissajous curves, particularly in terms of the distortion from their linear elliptical shape. Finally we define σcrit as the minimum of σcrit,1 and σcrit,3:
σcrit = min(σcrit,1,σcrit,3). (13)
Similarly, the critical strain for nonlinearity can be computed from the MAOStrain material functions, measured on the ARES-G2 rheometer as described in Appendix C. The critical strain γcrit is the minimum of γcrit,1 and γcrit,3
γcrit = min(γcrit,1,γcrit,3), (14)
which are defined as√ ([e1]γ3crit)2 +([ωv1]γ 3 crit)
2√ (G′σcrit)2 +(G′′σcrit)2 = ε ⇒ γcrit,1(ω)√ ε =
√ |G∗|√
([e1])2 +(ω[v1])2 , (15)
and √ ([e3]γ3crit)2 +([ωv3]γ 3 crit)
2√ (G′σcrit)2 +(G′′σcrit)2 = ε ⇒ γcrit,3(ω)√ ε =
√ |G∗|√
([e3])2 +(ω[v3])2 . (16)
The critical strain-rate amplitude can be obtained from the critical strain as
γ̇crit = γcritω. (17)
Figure 9 compares the De-dependent critical stress, strain, and strain rate, all dimensionless (as
σcrit/G0, γcrit , and τ0γ̇crit) and normalized by √ ε following Eq. 10. Remarkably, the dimensionless critical stress approaches equivalence with the critical strain in the elastic limit (high Deborah number) and approaches the dimensionless critical strain rate in the viscous limit (low Deborah number). We hypothesize that this result can be justified by first considering that the stress is dominated by the viscous contribution at low frequencies and elastic effects at high frequencies for a viscoelastic liquid. Specifically for PVA-Borax, the emergence of nonlinearity is directly related to the local stretch (deformation) of the polymer chains15,43, rather than other deviations from equilibrium such as polymer orientation or network junction breakage. Therefore, we can hypothesize that nonlinearity arises due to the micromechanical strain of elastic (polymeric) units. In the elastic limit De → ∞, the deformation timescales are shorter than the timescale of transient network bond dissociation, and the applied strain is fully translated into the micromechanical stretch of the polymer strands, which will exceed the linearity threshold at a critical characteristic forcing strain γcrit , consistent with the physical picture. Quantitatively, this critical strain maps directly to a critical elastic stress σcrit = G0γcrit , equal to the critical total stress if purely viscous solvent contributions are neglected and if strain nonlinearities are neglected. In the absence of purely viscous stresses, this predicts γcrit = σcrit/G0 in the limit De → ∞, a close correspondence that we observe in Fig. 9. We specifically observe a slightly larger dimensionless critical stress, consistent with a purely viscous solvent being present that adds to the total observed stress. Another explanation of the slight discrepancy is that the approximation σcrit = G0γcrit will underpredict the critical stress since, for a stiffening material like PVA-Borax, the effective modulus will be higher than the linear plateau modulus G0. Therefore, the dimensionless critical stress calculated as σcrit/G0 will be higher than the critical strain γcrit . In the viscous limit De → 0, the stress is independent of the total accumulated strain and instead is proportional to the strain rate. We expect a critical strain rate γ̇crit associated with a critical stress as σcrit ≈ η0γ̇crit (neglecting solvent viscosity and nonlinearity of the stress-strain rate relationship). The nonlinearity for PVA-Borax is caused by micromechanical polymer strain, which in this limit is proportional to the applied strain rate. The critical dimensionless stress is then
σcrit/G0 = (η0/G0)γ̇crit , or in terms of dimensionless critical strain rate, σcrit/G0 = τ0γ̇crit This rationalizes the close correspondence of dimensionless critical stress and strain rate in the limit De → 0, as we observe in Fig. 9. The slightly higher normalized critical stress, however, can also be explained by the neglected solvent viscosity and thickening nonlinearity of PVA-Borax in the prediction σcrit ≈ η0γ̇crit . The critical stress values at De ≪ 1 and De ≫ 1 are similar but different, and some insight is provided by considering the critical micromechanical strain (polymer stretch) for PVA-Borax in steady flow. The accumulated polymer strain under steady flow is ∝ γ̇τ (equivalent to a Weissenberg number50), where τ is a characteristic relaxation time of the elastic components that determines the accumulated micromechanical strain for a given strain rate γ̇ . Assuming that the critical accumulated micromechanical strain is proportional to γcrit observed in the limit De ≫ 1, this predicts γ̇crit ≈ γcrit/τ . Then in the De ≪ 1 limit, the critical stress is σcrit = η0 ˙γcrit , or σcrit/G0 = (τ0/τ)γcrit . Therefore, the ratio τ0/τ may rationalize the difference in critical stress in the limit De ≪ 1 compared to De ≫ 1. We observe a lower critical stress for De ≪ 1, suggesting that the ratio τ0/τ < 1. If the characteristic timescale τ that determines the accumulated critical polymer stretch in steady flow is close to the average relaxation time τ0, then the critical stress in the elastic limit and viscous limit will be similar. However, if these two timescales differ (e.g. for polydisperse systems), then the critical stress may be different. For example, Nichetti and ManasZloczower derived that for a polymer melt with a lognormal distribution of molecular weights, where the critical stress is constant for all molecular weights, the
The potential universality of critical stress might extend to a broad range of viscoelastic liquids. It is conceivable that any given viscoelastic liquid could exhibit a finite critical strain, γcrit , in the elastic limit (De → ∞) and a finite critical strain rate, γ̇crit , in the viscous limit (De → ∞). This would imply that the critical stress (σcrit = G0γcrit for De ≫ 1 and σcrit = η0γ̇crit for De ≪ 1) approach plateaus in these limits. However, the critical strain and strain rate are expected to exhibit diverging behavior in the limit of De ≪ 1 and De ≫ 1, respectively. Therefore, while our experimental observations suggest the universality of critical stress will hold more generally, further research is needed to confirm and generalize this finding to other materials. Supporting evidence already exists. For example, our observations align with an earlier study by Hatzikiriakos and Dealy51, which reported a frequency-independent critical stress for instability/wall slip in a sliding plate rheometer, another type of nonlinearity under oscillatory shear deformations. The universality of critical stress may allow for faster characterization of material properties us-
ing the frequency-sweep MAOS method14. This technique eliminates the need for a full amplitude sweep at every frequency and instead relies on the ability to predict at which amplitude the MAOS material functions can be measured. Based on that prediction, a single amplitude measurement is done at every frequency. Since the critical stress varies slightly as a function of De compared to critical strain, applying the frequency-sweep MAOS technique in MAOStress should be simpler. This will result in a high-throughput characterization while minimizing the impact of chemical and physical changes in the loaded material. A similar phenomenon is utilized in medium amplitude superposition (MAPS) measurements, where the optimal window is frequency-independent in stress-controlled mode52. Additionally, this work shows that the change in the critical stress amplitude required to measure MAOStress nonlinearities is much smaller than MAOStrain measurements, making the MAOStress technique potentially more accessible than MAOStrain. v. conclusion The MAOStress response of PVA-Borax was thoroughly studied, showing that stress-controlled measurements can offer another route for testing the weakly nonlinear regime and answer fundamental questions regarding the origins of nonlinearity in viscoelastic materials. The MAOStress results confirmed the stiffening nature of PVA-Borax and showed that stress is a more universal measure of nonlinearity strength across a wide range of De, consistent with the microstructure of PVA-Borax. Moreover, the measured linearity limits can be interpreted as Pipkin map regime boundaries, offering experimental testing and validation of theoretical predictions. The SSTNM model was used to derive a viable normalization of the nonlinear MAOStress material functions that account for their scaling with the linear material properties. The frequency dependence of the normalized material functions revealed a simplicity in the features of MAOStress material functions compared to MAOStrain. The intrinsic nonlinearities were used to derive a threshold-independent critical forcing amplitude and to show that stress is a more universal measure of nonlinearity strength as its frequency variability at the emergence of nonlinearity is much smaller than MAOStrain. This fundamental result should be considered when studying deformation-induced physical phenomena at different timescales or frequencies. Moreover, this result has significant implications for small amplitude oscillatory shear measurements (SAOS). A common practice for choosing a strain or stress amplitude for a linear SAOS measurement is to do an amplitude sweep at different frequencies and choose a strain or stress in different frequency ranges with a good signal-to-noise ratio without being in the nonlinear regime. With the insights from section IV, it may suffice to only do an amplitude sweep at each end of the frequency range to find a suitable stress amplitude for the entire frequency range of a measurement. 