The unique chemical reactivity of cysteine residues results in various posttranslational modifications (PTMs), which are implicated in regulating a range of fundamental biological processes. With the advent of chemical proteomics technology, thousands of cysteine PTM (CysPTM) sites have been identified from multiple species. A few CysPTM-based databases have been developed, but they mainly focus on data collection rather than various annotations and analytical integration. Here, we present a platform-dubbed CysModDB, integrated with the comprehensive CysPTM resources and analysis tools. CysModDB contains five parts: (1) 70 536 experimentally verified CysPTM sites with annotations of sample origin and enrichment techniques, (2) 21 654 modified proteins annotated with functional regions and structure information, (3) cross-references to external databases such as the protein–protein interactions database, (4) online computational tools for predicting CysPTM sites and (5) integrated analysis tools such as gene enrichment and investigation of sequence features. These parts are integrated using a customized graphic browser and a Basket. The browser uses graphs to represent the distribution of modified sites with different CysPTM types on protein sequences and mapping these sites to the protein structures and functional regions, which assists in exploring cross-talks between the modified sites and their potential effect on protein functions. The Basket connects proteins and CysPTM sites to the analysis tools. In summary, CysModDB is an integrated platform to facilitate the CysPTM research, freely accessible via https://cysmoddb.bioinfogo.org/. introduction Cysteine contains a thiol side chain with high nucleophilicity and redox sensitivity, which makes cysteine susceptible to many reactive molecules and generates different cysteine PTM types (CysPTMs). The modification types can be classified into three categories due to their characteristics: oxidation posttranslational modification (PTM) [1], lipid PTM [2, 3] and metabolite PTM [4]. The oxidation PTM means cysteine oxidation by reactive oxygen species, reactive nitrogen species, reactive sulfur species or glutathione (GSH) [1]. It includes s-nitrosylation, s-sulfenylation, ssulfinylation, s-sulfonylation, s-glutathionylation, s-disulfidation and s-persulfidation. The lipid PTM refers to cysteine lipidation [3, 5], including s-palmitoylation and s-prenylation. The metabolite
PTM covers a series of nonenzymatic modifications caused by reactive metabolites [6], such as s-itaconation, s-succination and s-carbonylation. Cysteine residues play various functional roles such as metal-binding, enzyme activation and structural stabilization, and cysteine modifications may regulate protein structures and functions [7]. It has been revealed that CysPTMs are associated with many diseases like cancer and neurodegenerative disorder [8, 9]. Identifying CysPTM sites on proteomes is the foundation of exploring their functional roles in biological activities. Nevertheless, it is challenging to directly detect CysPTM sites on a proteomic scale due to their low abundance and significant dynamic changes. Unlike some PTM types (e.g. tyrosine phosphorylation
ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
and lysine acylation) that can be easily enriched by antibodies, the enrichment of the CysPTM sites is mainly based on chemical proteomics techniques, where various chemical probes have been invented [10]. For instance, a chemical probe named cysteinereactive phosphate tag (CPT) was developed for detecting cysteine oxidation, and around 34 000 oxidation sites were identified on ∼9400 mouse proteins [11]. Nevertheless, the CPT probe cannot distinguish different oxidation subtypes. In contrast, the DYn2 sulfenic acid probe is specific to s-sulfenylation, and 1105 ssulfenylated sites were identified using this probe from human RKO cells [12]. As a flood of CysPTM sites were identified, several databases have been developed to host CysPTM information (e.g. RedoxDB [13], dbPTM [14], dbSNO [15], dbGSH [16], SwissPalm [17] and iCysMod [18]). Nevertheless, they have a few limitations. First, these databases cover specific or limited CysPTM types. For example, many newly discovered types (e.g. s-itaconation [19] and ssuccination [20]) have not been collected. Second, they include insufficient information. Generally, the information on identification techniques or sample origin is omitted, which is essential to estimate PTM data quality, compare the PTM profiles identified using different probes and guide further functional investigation [21]. Third, few visualization browsers are provided to show the CysPTM sites on protein sequences, or they cannot be used to estimate the potential effect of the modified sites on protein functions. In summary, a platform is missing that integrates data collection, annotations of modified sites and proteins and analytical tools to characterize the CysPTM sites, such as PTM crosstalks, sequence features and their effects on protein structures and functions. In this study, we present an integrative platform-dubbed CysModDB. It contains 70 536 CysPTM sites experimentally identified on 21 654 proteins across 12 organisms, from prokaryotes to eukaryotes. These sites consist of 12 different CysPTM types, which is the most extensive compared with previous databases. CysModDB is composed of five parts: (1) PTM site annotations, including flanking regions, sample origin and enrichment techniques, (2) protein annotations, covering sequences with highlighted CysPTM positions, functional regions, subcellular locations and structure information, (3) cross-references to external databases for protein pathways (Reactome [22]), protein–protein interactions (STRING [23]) and protein PTMs (dbPTM [14]), (4) online computational tools for predicting CysPTM sites and 5) an analysis toolkit, composed of gene enrichment analysis, regulatory network and investigation of sequence features. The five parts are integrated using a customized graphic browser and a Basket. The browser uses graphs to represent the distribution of modified sites with different CysPTM types on protein sequences, the CysPTM co-occurrences and the mapping of these sites to the protein structures and functional regions, which assists in exploring cross-talks between the modified sites and the potential effect of these sites on protein functions. The Basket links selected proteins to the analysis toolkit or external resources for analyzing sequence features and cross-talks of these CysPTMs. In brief, CysModDB is a comprehensive platform with manually curated resources and analysis tools for cysteine modifications. materials and methods  data collection The data collection pipeline is shown in Supplementary Figure S1. Specifically, we retrieved literature in the PubMed database using ‘cysteine’ or ‘cysteine proteomics’ combined with specific
CysPTM names (or synonyms). They include s-nitrosylation (s-nitrosothiols, s-nitrosocysteine or s-nitrosation), s-sulfenylation (cysteine sulfenic acids, s-sulfenation or s-sulphenylation), s-sulfinylation (cysteine sulfinic acid or s-sulfination), s-sulfony lation (cysteine sulfonic acid or s-sulfonation), s-glutathionylation, s-disulfidation (disulfide bonds), s-persulfidation (s-sulfhydration or persulfide), s-palmitoylation (s-acylation), s-prenylation (farnesylation or geranylgeranylation), s-carbonylation (cysteine alkylation or HNE-modified cysteine), s-itaconation and ssuccination (s-(2-succino) cysteine). Over 300 articles were obtained, and most were published between 2009 and 2021 (Supplementary Table S1). After manually scanning these papers, the data from high-throughput proteomics studies were collected as the CysPTM data source (Figure 1A). We further extracted essential information from the literature, including identification approaches, experimental sample names, protein names and cysteine positions with PTM types. We explored online prediction algorithms for the CysPTM sites from literature (Figure 1A) and retained 10 accessible tools to date (Figure 1B), such as DeepCSO [24], DeepGSH [25], GPS-Palm [26], iPreny-PseAAC [27], iSulf-Cys [28], Mul-SNO [29], PreSNO [30], SIMLIN [31], SulCysSite [32] and pCysMod [33]. data processing The CysPTM data extracted from the literature were annotated and integrated with external resources (Supplementary Figure S2). The CysPTM information was clustered into two levels: modified sites and proteins (Figure 1B). The information for each site includes the CysPTM type and the related modification category, the identification approach, the name of the sample (or cell line) where the modification was detected, flanking sequence regions from the corresponding protein in the UniProtKB database [34] and the references (i.e. PubMed IDs). The information for each protein includes gene and protein names, UniProt AC, organism, functional description, subcellular location, protein sequence with highlighted CysPTM sites, functional regions, secondary structure [34] and tertiary structure from the AlphaFold database [35, 36]. In addition, every protein was cross-referenced with three external databases (i.e. Reactome Pathway Database, STRING and dbPTM [14, 22, 23]), providing information about involved pathways, protein–protein interactions and PTM cross-talks. Development of online analysis tools CysModDB includes four online bioinformatics tools: gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, regulatory network, sequence logo and composition heatmap (Figure 1B). The former two tools were developed for modified proteins, while the latter two were used for modified sequences. The GO enrichment analysis facilitates the enrichment analysis of the CysPTM proteins in specific categories, and the regulatory network reveals the potential regulatory relationships between the modified proteins. The sequence logo and the composition heatmap graphically represent multiple sequence alignment results. The GO enrichment analysis was developed using the Enrichr web API [37] for statistical protein enrichment analysis. The output would show the results of GO:biological process (BP), GO:molecular function (MF) and GO:cellular component (CC). Additionally, the regulatory network was based on the STRING API [23]. Both GO analysis results and regulatory network are visualized by Echarts [38]. The sequence logo was based on WebLogo [39] and generated using the flanking sequence of modified cysteines. Each logo consists of stacks of symbols, and one stack corresponds to a
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 1. The construction procedure of the CysModDB. (A) Information collection. The experimentally identified CysPTMs were manually retrieved from the literature. The identification approaches and online prediction tools were collected as well. (B) The pipeline for data processing and the integration of online tools. (C) The framework of the web-server construction. position of the sequence. The height of symbols within the stack indicates the relative frequency of each amino at that position. The composition heatmap was built using two modules, i.e. position probability matrix (PPM) and position weight matrix (PWM), from the seqlogo python package [39]. PPM describes the probability of each amino acid on each position of the sequences. PWM illustrates the pattern of the amino acid distribution around the modified cysteines. The PPM and PWM for each Basket can be separately calculated through the following formulas. MPPM = ⎛ ⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝ P1,1 P1,2 · · · P1,n P2,1 P2,2 · · · P2,n ... ... . . . ...
Pm,1 Pm,2 · · · Pm,n
⎞ ⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠ ,
MPWM = log2 (
MPPM bm
) ,
where Pm,n is the probability of the amino acid m at the position n of the sequences. PWM is the PPM converted into log-likelihood, where bm is the probability of amino acid m in the proteome. In this module, m is up to 20, and the range of n value is from −15 to +15. web-server implementation Figure 1C shows various web applications for developing the front and back ends. The form layout of the front end was arranged using HTML5 and Bootstrap 5. Data and statistical results were shown using two JavaScript packages: D3 and Echarts. Notably, an interactive graphic browser was developed to visualize the PTM sites on proteins. Protein and PTM annotations were outputted using ProtVista and Echarts [38, 40]. Protein tertiary structures with CysPTM annotations were visualized by the interactive viewer 3Dmol.js [41]. On the back end, input data were processed using the Python-based framework Django. All the data were stored and organized by MySQL and Redis (Figure 1C). AJAX was used for the communication between the front-end and the backend. Jquery was applied to improve interactive development and browser compatibility. Form validation and CSRF validation were added to prevent potential security risks. results Figure 1 shows the construction procedure of CysModDB, which includes three steps. The first step is information collection. The experimentally identified CysPTM sites and identification approaches were retrieved from the literature, as well as online computational programs for predicting CysPTM sites. The second step includes data processing and the integration of online tools. The third step is the web-server construction for storing, showing and visualizing the collected information. The details of each step can be found in ‘Materials and Methods’. In the following, we present the features and functions of the database. data summary and statistics CysModDB contains 70 536 experimentally identified CysPTM sites on 21 654 proteins across 12 organisms. These sites are annotated with 12 modification types and classified into three PTM categories according to the modification characteristics: seven in the oxidation PTM category, two in the lipid PTM category and three in the metabolite PTM category (Figure 2). Among the three categories, oxidation includes the largest number of PTM sites and proteins (60 702 sites and 25 317 proteins), perhaps because oxidation is a common biological reaction throughout the lifespan (Figure 3A) [42]. Interestingly, the number of s-sulfonylation sites in the oxidation category is minimal (89 sites from 61 proteins), probably because it is at the highest oxidation state. Oxidized cysteines in vivo can be identified using advanced chemical proteomics techniques based on the thiol blocking strategy, like the CPT tags [11]. It should be noted that some tags (e.g. CPT) can identify but not distinguish multiple oxidation types, and the modified sites identified using these tags were grouped and annotated as ‘not elsewhere classified’ (nec.) (Figure 3A). Additionally, CysModDB includes three metabolite PTM types (i.e. s-itaconation [19], s-succination [20] and s-carbonylation [43]), which are excluded in previous databases [18]. We investigated the distribution of different modified sites clustered into different PTM types and organisms (Figure 3B). The majority of CysPTM sites are from the human and mouse
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 2. Classification of 12 CysPTM types into three categories. (A) Two types in the lipid PTM category, (B) three types in the metabolite PTM category and (C) seven types in the oxidation PTM category. species (human/mouse: 19 072/40 403 sites), covering all three categories. Additionally, s-glutathionylation was widely investigated across six organisms, whereas s-prenylation and s-carbonylation were explored in a single organism and require further analysis. Besides, we collected 32 approaches developed to identify CysPTM sites and 10 online computational programs for predicting the CysPTM sites (Figure 3C). All the prediction tools focus on oxidation and lipid PTM categories, probably due to numerous related CysPTM sites identified. In contrast, no predictor has been developed for the recently reported metabolite PTM types. Supplementary Table S2 lists the detailed information of the 10 prediction models, including data size, feature encodings and algorithms. We compared the models and found that the early ones were based on traditional machine learning algorithms (e.g. support vector machine and random forest), while the late ones relied on advanced algorithms (e.g. XGBoost and deep neural network). For example, four models for predicting ssulfenylation sites have been developed, i.e. iSulf-Cys [28], SulCysSite [32], SIMLIN [31] and DeepCSO [24] (Supplementary Table S2). The latest model DeepCSO, superior to others, was constructed using deep-learning-based long short-term memory instead of traditional machine learning algorithms used in the other models (Supplementary Table S2). Data query and result display The ‘Home’ page briefly introduces CysModDB and data statistics (Figure 4A). The ‘Statistics’ diagram is an interactive Sankey diagram using Echarts [38] and shows the number of CysPTM sites annotated with different PTM types from distinct species. The diagram links the CysPTM sites to the organisms and the CysPTM categories through weighted lines, where the line thickness is proportional to the number of CysPTM sites. Additionally, the data are accessible via either the ‘Browse’ page or the ‘Search’ page (Figure 4B). The ‘Browse’ page contains two parts: ‘Browse by PTM type’ and ‘Browse by organisms’, where each item is clickable to query the results (Figure 4B). There are three options on the ‘Search’ page (i.e. simple, advanced and multiple searches), where gene name, protein name, UniProt AC and organism name are
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 3. The data statistics of CysModDB. (A) The statistics of the CysPTM types in the three categories. The numbers of modified sites and proteins are shown for each type. s-oxidation (nec.) means oxidized cysteine not elsewhere classified. (B) The distribution of different modified sites clustered into different PTM types and organisms. (C) The summary of experimental identification techniques and the available online tools for predicting CysPTM sites. supported as queries (Figure 4C). We exemplified the usage via ‘glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase’ (GAPDH), an essential enzyme in glycolytic metabolism. The result page showed the table containing Gene Name, Protein Name, PTM categories, Organism, UniProt AC and CMID (i.e. CysModDB ID) (Figure 4D). Notably, GAPDH has a few isoforms with different UniProt AC. The detailed information on mouse GAPDH (UniProt AC: P16858) can be visited from the ‘Detailed page’ via the hyperlink of its CMID. This page shows the annotations on this protein and its
CysPTM sites (Figure 4E). The top part contains the summary of the protein and the identified CysPTM types so that the users can take a quick overview. Below the summary, an interactive graphic browser shows the protein sequence with the annotations of the modified cysteines and PTM types, protein functional regions and secondary structures. The Zoom bar can be adjusted to focus on CysPTM site(s) in a specific region, enabling the investigation of the potential functions. For instance, four modifications of cysteine at the 150th position (i.e. C150) are shown in the second
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 4. The essential functions of CysModDB. (A) The homepage of CysModDB. An interactive statistics diagram is shown at the bottom. (B) The ‘Browse’ page. The entries can be browsed by selecting organisms or CysPTM types. (C) The ‘Search’ page contains three search options: simple, advanced and multiple. (D) The results page shows the search results. (E) The detailed information of a single result entry. part of Figure 4E. C150 is annotated as an active site and localized in glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate binding region (Figure 4E). Similar to the active site C195 of isocitrate lyase, whose S-itaconation can block the enzyme activity and cause inhibition of bacterial growth [44], these C150 modifications may affect GAPDH catalytic activity and result in metabolic abnormalities. The third part of Figure 4E shows protein information, including UniProt ID, protein functions, subcellular locations and protein sequence with modified cysteines highlighted in red. The fourth part displays a PTM table that summarizes the information of the CysPTM sites, including position, sequence window, PTM type, identification strategy, identification approach, sample origin, reference and publication year. For example, GAPDH C22 was annotated with three modification types: s-nitrosylation identified from mouse ischemia heart cells using the SNOxICAT approach [45], sglutathionylation recognized from RAW 264.7 cells based on the TMT approach [46] and s-oxidation (nec.) detected by CPT from distinct mouse tissues [11]. The annotations about identification techniques and sample origins contribute to further investigation of C22 modifications. The fifth part of Figure 4E shows the GAPDH tertiary structure with modified cysteines highlighted, which facilitates structural investigation of PTM sites. Finally, three external databases (i.e. Reactome [22], STRING [23] and dbPTM
[14]) were cross-referenced to provide additional information about protein pathways, protein–protein interactions and PTM cross-talks for this protein. online analysis tools CysModDB includes a few analysis tools on the ‘Tools’ page, enabling users to promptly analyze the features of the modified sites or proteins of interest (Figure 5). These tools include GO enrichment [37, 47], regulatory network [23], sequence logo [39] and composition heatmap [48]. The items of interest in the PTM table can be selected and saved in the Basket, which appears as a slide page when clicking the Basket button (Figure 5A). The saved items can be moved to Basket A for further analysis. If the items are composed of those with two different features (e.g. sites with different modification types), they can be split into two Baskets (Baskets A and B) to examine the similarities and differences between the two baskets of items (Figure 5A). We took the mouse proteins containing the s-itaconation as an example to demonstrate the analysis of GO enrichment analysis. Figure 5B shows the enrichment results for BP, MF and CC, where the Pvalue threshold can be adjusted. For instance, these proteins were predominantly enriched in RNA metabolic process (GO:0016070;
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
FDR-adjusted P-value = 3.0e−08), RNA binding (GO:0003723; FDRadjusted P-value = 1.3e−60) and nucleus (GO:0005634; FDRadjusted P-value = 2.0e−26), indicating s-itaconation may play a role in regulating transcription. Indeed, s-itaconation can suppress inflammation by metabolism regulation and antiinflammatory signal pathway [19]. Here we selected three sitaconated proteins to generate a small regulatory network. The proteins included LDHA and IDH1, related to energy metabolism,
and Keap1, an anti-inflammatory transcription factor. Figure 5C shows that all three proteins interact with a series of other proteins, suggesting that s-itaconation may regulate macrophage activity via multiple pathways. The occurrence of a PTM site is usually affected by the residues around the modified site. In other words, certain amino acid types may be preferred as flanking residues for a specific PTM type. The preference for flanking residues can be identified using
/bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Modification types 12 types: S-NO, S-OH, S-O2H, S-O3H, S-SG, S-SH, S-SR, S-Palm, S-Pren, S-Carb, S-Ita, S-Suc, S-oxidation(nec.) 8 types: S-NO, S-OH, S-O2H, S-SG, S-SH, S-SR, S-Palm, S-oxidation(nec.) 1 type: S-Palm 1 type: S-NO
Data main source Literature retrieving Database collection Literature retrieving Literature retrieving Number of PTM sites 70 536 85 747 7459 4165 Protein information Protein functions √ √ √ √ Full sequences Provided with PTM
positions highlighted
√ √ √
Subcellular localization √ – √ √ Secondary structure Experimentally
determined Prediction by NetSurfP-2.0 – Experimentally
determined Tertiary structure Extracted from AlphaFold
DB – – Extracted from PDB
Functional regions Extracted from Uniprot – – Extracted from InterPro Pathways Link to Reactome – – Link to KEGG Protein–protein interactions Link to STRING – – – ptm site information PTM types √ √ √ √ PubMed IDs √ √ √ √ Flanking sequences √ √ – √ PTM cross-talks Link to dbPTM – – Link to dbPTM Sample origin √ – √ – PTM detection techniques √ – √ – Visualization Interactive Interactive – Static Online analysis tools GO analysis, regulatory
network, sequence logo and composition heatmaps
– – SNO-containing protein regulatory network external prediction tools 10 – – – Data acquisition Direct download By request Direct download Direct download File formats for download tsv, xml, fasta and json tsv tsv and json tsv
two tools: sequence logo and composition heatmap. For example, we compared the sequence characteristics of s-itaconation and other CysPTM types on the s-itaconation-containing proteins. We saved the s-itaconation sites (1117 sites) in Basket A and put the rest (2181 sites) into Basket B. Figure 5D shows the sequence logos for the Baskets A and B data, respectively. The residue serine (S) is preferable in the s-itaconation logo, whereas leucine (L) is preferred in another logo, suggesting the enrichment of S and depletion of L around the s-itaconation sites. We further compared them using the position heatmap tool based on the PPM and PWM, which shows the pattern of the amino acid distribution around the modified cysteine [49]. The S enrichment and L depletion around the s-itaconation sites compared with other PTM types were evident on both heatmaps (Figure 5E). The PWM heatmap shows that S is enriched in the s-itaconation sequence compared with its occurrence frequency of the mouse proteome. All the results are downloadable. Overall, CysModDB integrates a series of tools for data analysis. other modules and functionalities The ‘Help’ page provides a detailed user guide for all sections in CysModDB via pictures and animations. Moreover, the modification data are freely downloadable on the ‘Download’ page with four available file formats (i.e. tsv, fasta, xml and json). Additionally, the ‘About’ page provides the contact information of the platform developers. discussion and conclusions With the identification of numerous CysPTM types and their significant roles in life activities, it is necessary to establish a comprehensive platform integrated with CysPTM data resources and online analysis tools for the community. CysModDB is such a platform, containing 70 536 CysPTM sites on 21 654 proteins across 12 organisms and covering 12 PTM types. Extensive information from external databases and literature is included to annotate the CysPTM sites and related proteins. CysModDB includes a customized graphic browser to visualize the distribution of modified sites with different CysPTM types on protein sequences and mapping these sites to protein structures and functional regions, which assists in exploring cross-talks between the modified sites and the potential influence of the CysPTM sites on protein functions. Online analysis tools are integrated, including gene enrichment, regulatory network, investigation of sequence features and online computational classifiers for predicting CysPTM sites. Compared with the reported CysPTM databases (Table 1), CysModDB contains more PTM types, richer annotations and information visualization and more data formats for downloading. Specifically, it includes experimental identification
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
Figure 6. CysPTM features and cross-talks in the human proteome. (A) The sequence similarity of different CysPTM types. Each cell contains the Euclidean distance value between the PPM matrices of every two CysPTM types. (B) The cross-talks among the CysPTM types identified in the human proteome (cross-talk number < 10 is not shown), visualized using EVenn [56]. techniques and sample origin information, showing the PTM heterogeneity in different cell types and the target preference of different identification techniques. Moreover, a few analysis tools are included to assist in analyzing the modified sites or types, such as comparing the patterns between different PTM types. We compared the number of CysPTM sites between CysModDB and iCysMod [18] and found that the latter contained more than 10 000 sites. Most of these 10 000 PTM sites were annotated in iCysMod with human oxidation but derived from the mouse species in vivo [11] (private communications with Dr Zexian Liu, the senior author of the iCysMod article). Besides, some cysteine modification data collected by other databases are excluded in CysModDB due to annotation inaccuracy caused by technical limitations [21]. For instance, sodium arsenate was applied to detect s-sulfenylation, but it was later found to identify disulfides as well, and therefore, the modified sites recognized by sodium arsenate cannot be annotated with s-sulfenylation only [1, 50]. As most of the CysPTM types in CysModDB are identified from the human species, we examined sequence preferences around the modification sites of different CysPTM types in humans. The results are similar to the previous study in the iCysMod database [18] (data not shown). Furthermore, we investigated the differences between the CysPTM types by calculating the Euclidean distance between the PPMs of every two CysPTM types. A short distance indicates similar sequence features. Figure 6A shows that the distance between s-nitrosylation and s-glutathionylation is the shortest, followed by that between s-nitrosylation and ssulfenylation, suggesting that s-nitrosylation has similar features to s-glutathionylation and s-sulfenylation. Indeed, the numbers of cross-talks between s-nitrosylation and these two oxidation subtypes are noteworthy compared with the cross-talks between any other two types (Figure 6B), which is consistent with the previous study [18, 51]. Interestingly, the distance between snitrosylation and s-succination is relatively short, suggesting both share certain sequence features (Figure 6A). Figure 6A also shows that s-palmitoylation is far from any other CysPTM type, probably because s-palmitoylation requires catalysis by enzymes with unique features, whereas the rest modification types do not [2]. Different CysPTM types can competitively co-occupy at the identical position. Such co-occurrences include pairwise cross-talks between two different CysPTM types at the same position and multiple cross-talks with more than two CysPTM
types. We investigated the cross-talks from the human CysPTM sites in CysModDB (Figure 6B; Supplementary Table S3). There are 1987 sites involved in pairwise cross-talks and 1262 sites involved in multiple cross-talks (Supplementary Table S3). snitrosylation contributed to the most PTM sites and formed the most cross-talks to other oxidation types (e.g. 464 to ssulfenylation, 419 to s-glutathionylation, 273 to s-persulfidation), which might match the fact that s-nitrosylation is the initial state of many oxidation types [52]. Additionally, as the three CysPTM types (i.e. s-glutathionylation: 1748, s-palmitoylation: 1525 and s-persulfidation: 1660) have a similar number of PTM sites, we investigated their pairwise cross-talks. The number of cross-talks between s-glutathionylation and s-persulfidation was 353, double than those for the other two pairs (196 and 165). This observation suggests the high similarity of both oxidation types and the difference between them and s-palmitoylation. Key Points
• CysModDB is a comprehensive platform including 70 536 cysteine PTM sites with 12 different types, covering the
D ow nloaded from https://academ ic.oup.com /bib/article/23/6/bbac460/6775608 by Indian Institute of Technology Patna user on 25 January 2024
largest number of PTM types compared with previous databases. • CysModDB comprises several parts: PTM site and protein annotations, cross-reference to external resources, online computational tools for predicting CysPTM sites and integrated analysis tools. They are integrated by a customized graphic browser and a ‘Basket’. • CysModDB is user-friendly, in which the information is easily accessible, and data are downloadable in various file formats.