Traditional art pricing models often lack fine measurements of painting content. This paper proposes a new content measurement: the Shannon information quantity measured by the singular value decomposition (SVD) entropy of the painting image. Using a large sample of artworks’ auction records and images, we show that the SVD entropy positively affects the sales price at 1% significance level. Compared to the other commonly adopted content variables, the SVD entropy has advantages in variable significance, sample robustness as well as model fit. Considering the convenient availability of digital painting images and the straightforward calculation algorithm of this measurement, we expect its wide application in future research. JEL: G12, Z1, Z11 1 theoretical background and hypothesis This section will discuss the theoretical background and explain how it leads to our main hypothesis. 1.1 information extraction from paintings Our research analyzes digital images of paintings. The digital image is composed of pixels. Each pixel is a basic information capsule that can be completely describled by the pixel’s R (red), G (green) and B(blue) values, and the pixel’s two-dimensional coordinates in the image plane.5 Researchers try to extract useful information from these painting images in order to better understand the price-formation mechanism of paintings. The literature in this strand mainly concentrates on the relationship between a painting’s color composition and its sales price. For example, Pownall and Graddy (2016) average the R, G and B values of all pixels in a painting image and introduce them into the traditional hedonic model as the new explanatory variables. Stepanova (2019) further integrates this three-dimensional RGB information via a clustering algorithm, and identifies those principal color clusters that may affect a painting’s sales price. Ma et al. (2022) study the effect of colors on artwork pricing via the HSV (hue, saturation, value) color system. HSV describes the three different aspects of color, each of which is a unique aggregation of the underlying RGB values.6 Compared to RGB values, the HSV system appears more intuitive considering the human perception of colors. The literature also raises two main concerns for us. First, previous research reveals certain links between colors and human emotions, e.g., Boyatzis and Varghese (1994) and Hemphill (1996). But how emotions can affect investment decisions seems more complex. There are both rational and behavioral schools in the study of investment decisions. To disentangle the effect of emotions during the art investment decision process poses great challenges. Further research is warranted for this color-emotion-investment transmission mechanism. Second, even though HSV is more intuitive than RGB, it does not reduce the dimensionality of information. How this multidimensional information interacts with each other to influnce art pricing also calls for further studies.7 More importantly, a painting’s colors
5RGB stands for the strength of the three additive primary colors (red, green and blue) in a pixel on the scale of 0 to 255. For example, RGB (0, 0, 0) means that the proportions of red, green and blue are all 0%, so the pixel is black. RGB (255, 255, 255) indicates that the proportions of the three colors are 100%, and the pixels are white. 6See Appendix A for detailed formulas. 7Besides HSV, there exist other alternative color models like HSI (hue, saturation, intensity), HSL
are intrinsically attached to its structural elements, such as line, shape, form, space, etc. This implies that the positional information of color element in the image plane shall also be considered, which, however, is often ignored in the previous research. A further complication also arises from the interaction of color elements with these structural elements when they contribute to the sales price aggregately. Ma et al. (2022) address some of these issues. For example, to separate the effect of colors from the structural elements of a painting, they adopt a sample that excludes those with figurative work, repeated patterns and less traditional shapes. To test the coloremotion-valuation mechanism, they run lab experiments in different locations, collecting the viewers’ subjective valuations for the images with different color attributes. We think the experiment results might be interpreted with some caution, because the actual sales price is driven by the real buyer’s decision (not the viewer’s). Interestingly, Blum (2021) finds that the tastes of collectors often go in the opposite direction to those of outsiders. From the above discussion, we can see that predicting a painting’s sales price based on its color component requires certain restrictions. In this paper, we then ask whether other types of information can be extracted from a painting’s image, which is more robust and applicable to more heterogenous painting contents. Drawing on the Shannon information theory, we suggest a concept called information quantity, as a new type of information extraction for paintings. The following discussion tries to answer two essential questions: the first is why the information quantity of a painting can be linked to its sales price, and the second is what direction this link is. 1.2 consensus on information quantity The valuation of a painting, as well as other cultural goods, is often considered to lack objective criteria. In contrast, for those traditional assets like stocks and bonds, we can always benchmark against their dividends and interests. In spite of the existence of generally agreed guidelines, the actual assessment of cultural goods often involves subjective judgements. When an artwork receives conflicting views, its valuation must (hue, saturation, lightness), HSB (hue, saturation, brightness), etc. Whether the effect of colors on art pricing is sensitive to the choice of color models also needs further studies. rely on some kind of consensus reached by specific groups through social interactions (Lamont (2009), Lewandowska and Smolarska (2020)). Then, what kind of attributes of artwork can share the agreement of all people? For a painting, we often point to those objective features, e.g., the painting size and material. They have long been included in the hedonic regression model. So we propose that those features of unambiguous consensus tend to act as significant pricing factors for paintings. Of course, the most essential part of a painting is its content. But people find it much harder to reach a consensus when interpreting an artwork’s content, because people are born with differential preferences (Graham et al. (2010), Blum (2021)). We suggest looking for those features in a painting’s content that can be described objectively, hence obtaining a natural consensus. Some of such variables that we know include the painting’s signature, date, color composition, etc. Not surprisingly, various researchers have already introduced them into the art pricing model. Note that the signature and date are dummy variables hence providing very coarse information on content. The color composition is unique to each painting, but it requires additional restrictions to be significant hence not robust (as we argued before and will show below). We propose the amount of information (information quantity) contained in the artwork image as a new content variable. It quantifies how much information a painting delivers to the audience. It uniquely labels each painting’s content and can be measured objectively. So it also belongs to the features of unambiguous consensus, similar to size, material, signature, etc. Naturally, it could also be a potentially significant pricing factor. In this paper, we adopt a narrow definition for information proposed by Claude Shannon, i.e., a message sent by a sender to a receiver. He suggested a quantity measurement for such information, defined as entropy. Shannon asserted that information is used to resolve uncertainty. Therefore, the amount of information a signal transmits can be quantified by the degree of uncertainty that the signal resolves. A higher degree of uncertainty from a signal implies a greater chance of ‘surprise’ by the receiver, hence resolving it delivers more information. More rigorously, Shannon’s entropy is defined as the sum of the probability of each state of the uncertainty multiplied by the log probability of that same
state, that is,
E = − n∑
i=1
pi log2 pi,
where pi is the probability of state i among all the n possible states for a signal. Shannon’s entropy formula is independent of the meaning of the message. In fact, Shannon (1948) suggested, “information in the form of a message often contains meaning, but that meaning is not a necessary condition for defining information. It is possible to have information without meaning, whatever that means.” When entropy avoids subjective interpretation completely, it becomes a consensus automatically. We can think of the content entropy for a painting similarly to the number of bytes for a file, which is an objective measurement too. We hypothesize that the Shannon information quantity (measured by entropy) would contribute to the sales price of a painting positively. Although a painting is not the same as a telegram, an analogy from the traditional telegram message may provide us some intuition. A telegram message is usually charged by the number of words used (objective) rather than the meaning or importance of the message (subjective). So statistically, we would expect a larger information quantity corresponds to a higher sales price of the painting, ceteris paribus. The underlying mechanism is similar to how the signature or the dated dummy affects the painting’s price. The literature generally finds that a painting with signature or date information on its image can obtain a higher auction price than those without, ceteris paribus. The reason is that this additional information resolves some kind of uncertainties about the painting, hence the buyer is willing to accept a higher bid for bearing a lower risk. This is a common principle in efficient financial market, which applies to the art market as well. Therefore, a painting with a higher Shannon information quantity transmits more information, hence resolving more uncertainties in one way or another. Consequently, a higher price is expected, ceteris paribus. 2 measurement of information quantity in an art- work
A digital image with a resolution of m × n has m pixels in the horizontal and n pixels in the vertical direction of the image. So the total number of pixels is mn. Then, the information contained in the image must be some kind of aggregation of the information from all mn pixels.8
Our approach is to first strip off the colors from each pixel. Considering colors will increase the dimensionality of measurement tremendously as we discussed before. When colors are removed, the whole picture becomes black-and-white, and each pixel can be uniquely described by its coordinates (i, j) in the two-dimensional image space and its grayscale value, denoted as grayscaleij. This information of all pixels will eventually be integrated into a one-dimensional measurement of the information quantity for the whole image. Note that the grayscale of a pixel is defined as the weighted sum of its primitive RGB values.9 For a black-and-white image, the R,G and B of a given pixel are equivalent, which all equal the pixel’s grayscale value. Moreover, different color models, regardless of HSV, HSL or HSI, become equivalent as well. Therefore, we can call the information in an image after its colors are removed the backbone information of the image. We will work on this backbone information to obtain our measurement of information quantity. Consider a digital image withm×n pixels. Its backbone information can be completely described by a m × n matrix with entry grayscaleij, where i ∈ {1, 2, ...m} and j ∈ {1, 2, ...n}. We denote this matrix as M . Then how can the information carried by M be measured in an integrated way? We adopt a one-dimensional measurement called SVD entropy to account for the information quantity contained by matrix M . 8Note that a higher resolution does not necessarily imply a larger information quantity. Shannon information quantity emphasizes the variation of the pixels rather than the absolute number of pixels. 9The NTSC (National Television Standards Committee) formula for the grayscale is 0.3R + 0.59G + 0.11B. The singular value decomposition (SVD) of M is given by
M = UΣV T ,
where U and V are orthonormal matrices of size m×m and n×n, respectively, and Σ is an m×n diagonal matrix. The diagonal entries σi = Σii for i = 1, . . . , p = min(m,n) are called the singular values of M . The singular values are nonnegative and in decreasing order,
σ1 ≥ σ2 ≥ · · · ≥ σp ≥ 0. The number of nonzero singular values corresponds to the rank of the matrix M .10
With SVD, M can always be decomposed as a weighted sum of separable matrices,
M = p∑ i=1 σi UiV T i , (1)
where Ui and Vi are the i-th column vectors of U and V , respectively. Here, UiV T i is a separable m × n matrix with intensity σi. SVD is a common tool to reduce the dimensionality of the data. The truncated SVD using the first r terms,
M̃r = r∑
i=1
σi UiV T i for r < p,
is the best approximation of the original matrix M among the matrices with rank r. The truncated SVD is often used to compress images into reduced storage. In Equation (1), the singular value σi is understood as the ‘probability‘ of a ‘state’ UiV T i of the matrix M . We can naturally define the entropy out of the singular values σi. The SVD entropy of M is given by the entropy of the normalized singular values:
E(M) = − p∑
i=1
σ̄i log2 σ̄i, where σ̄i = σi∑p k=1 σk . 10Note that the special case of SVD applied to the covariance matrix is well known as principal component analysis (PCA). Since the covariance matrix is symmetric (and positive semidefinite), U = V (m = n), and the singular values are also the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix. The mathematical property of the SVD entropy is similar to that of the traditional Shannon entropy. The possible minimum value of the SVD entropy is zero, E(M) = 0, when there is only one nonzero singular value.11 For example, a monotone image (e.g., all pixels with the same grayness) has zero SVD entropy. The possible maximum value is E(M) = log p when the singular values are all the same as a nonzero value. The maximum value is achieved when a painting is represented by any orthonormal matrix. Note: Figure 1 plots the distributions of the normalized singular values (bottom) of ‘Composition with Red, Blue and Yellow’ by Piet Mondrian and ‘Number 5’ by Jackson Pollock. The grayscale SVD entropy values of the two paintings are 3.91 and 7.96. For SVD, the paintings are rescaled to 400× 400. Figure 1 illustrates the singular value distribution and SVD entropy with two paintings: Composition with Red, Blue and Yellow by Piet Mondrian (left) and Number 5 by Jackson Pollock (right). They are both transformed from the original color images into the gray ones. The two paintings show a stark contrast in complexity. Composition with
11We assume that 0 · log 0 = limx→0 x log2 x = 0
Red, Blue and Yellow has an SVD entropy 3.91, as its singular values are concentrated near zero. However, Number 5 has an SVD entropy of 7.96, as its singular values are widely spread out. This SVD entropy value is close to the maximum possible value, log2 400 = 8.64. SVD entropy has several properties suitable for computing the information quantity based on digital images. For example, singular values are invariant under both rotation (by 90◦, 180◦, and 270◦) and reflection (on the x and y axes). Additionally, SVD entropy is invariant under the linear scaling of the image matrix (e.g., brightness adjustment). Because the singular values of λM are λσi (λ > 0), the SVD entropy of λM is the same as that of M . SVD entropy is widely applied in feature selection research in computer graphics, e.g., Banerjee and Pal (2014) and Buisine et al. (2021). SVD effectively extracts the important features from a painting, so the entropy based on these important features, i.e., the SVD entropy, will be an appropriate measurement for the painting’s information quantity. 3 data and methodology Next, we will describe our data and empirical methodology, which we adopt to test the effect of SVD entropy on a painting’s sales price. 3.1 data We obtain our data from FindArtInfo, an art database website that provides auction records of artwork worldwide from 2000 to 2015. The database has a large number of records with auction prices, painting attributes, and digital images of auctioned items, making it ideal for our research. A lot of recent research, such as Filipiak and Filipowska (2016), Ayub et al. (2017), and Powell et al. (2019), has adopted this database. In particular, we collect auction records from the website using the web crawler algorithm modified from that used in Ayub et al. (2017).12
The database contains more than one million auction records of artwork in various forms from approximately 300,000 artists. To focus on the artworks with liquidity, we restrict our sample to the auction items that belong to the top 1% artists, who are ranked by the number of auction records (with images) in the database. We then obtain 3,004 artists, whose minimum number of observations is 99. Among all forms of artwork, we only select those related to paintings via their medium keywords as the search criteria.13 Finally, we obtain 529,654 observations with digital images. Although they are only from the top 1% artists, the sample accounts for approximately 38% of the total records in the database. Table 1 reports the distribution of the auction prices. We can see that most of the auction prices (75.44%) fall into the range between 100 and 100,000 US dollars. When retrieving the digital images, we resize them to uniform 400× 400 pixels using the bicubic interpolation method rather than using the images in their original resolutions.14 This is because we want to compare the SVD entropies when the physical dimensions of the painting are controlled. Note that the width and height of paintings are to be included as control variables in all of our regression specifications as well. 13We eliminate those records with the following keywords in their medium labels: bronze, iron, sculpture, terracotta, assemblage, steel, marble, aluminum, brass, ceramic, porcelain, resin, plaster, metal, plastic and stone. 14See Keys (1981) for the introduction of bicubic interpolation. 3.2 variables and the hedonic regression From each normalized image, the grayscale SVD entropy, denoted as Eg, is calculated according to the description in Section 2. For the whole sample, the mean of Eg is 5.18, with a standard deviation of 1.08. The maximum value of Eg is 8.04, and the minimum is 1.07e-12. Table 2 provides the summary statistics of all the variables for our empirical study. Besides the dependent variable auction price, and the key explanatory variable SVD entropy, Table 2 lists all the other control variables, such as painting size, artist’s signature and date, medium, artist, auction house and city, and auction year and month. We can see that the average auction price is 37,812 USD and that the price dispersion appears to be quite large. Note that we have already converted auction prices to inflation-adjusted USD.15 The average height and width of the paintings are both approximately 19 inches. 72% and 27% of the paintings in the sample are signed and dated, respectively. For each dummy variable in Table 2, we show the statistics of one representative value while omitting the rest for brevity. For example, the artist dummy differentiates all 3,004 artists. We only supply the statistics for Pablo Picasso, whose observations are the most in the sample, reaching 6,589. When we construct the dummies for the variables like medium, auction house, and auction city, we condense those minor categories for each variable because the classification provided by the database is too fine. For these variables, we first rank the categories by their frequencies in the sample. We then take the top 50 mediums, the top 20 auction houses, and the top 20 auction cities. For the rest of the minor classes, we group them into the ‘other ’ category for each variable. The other categories in medium, auction houses, and auction cities account for 30.60%, 51.21%, and 36.93% of the sample respectively. Finally, the year and month dummies are also introduced to control for the time effect of auction.16
We apply the following hedonic regression model to test the effect of the information 15We use 2000 as the base year for the inflation adjustment. 16Note that the year dummy does not include year 2001 to 2003, because our sample with top 1%
artists has no auction records during this period. quantity in a painting’s image on its sales price:
log pi = αEi + K∑ k=1 βkXki + T∑ t=1 γtDit + i, (2)
where Ei is the set of information quantity measurements (i.e., the SVD entropy and its square term) of painting i, Xki is the set of time-invariant characteristics of painting i (e.g., the height, width, medium dummy, signature dummy), and Dit is the set of time varying idiosyncratic attributes (e.g., year dummy and month dummy) of painting i. The logarithm of the inflation-adjusted price pi of painting i sold at the auction is used as the dependent variable in the regression. 4 empirical results We first provide the empirical results for the benchmark regression according to Equation (2). Then we run various robustness tests by considering the topics and styles of the paintings. 4.1 benchmark regression Table 3 presents the results for the benchmark regressions according to Equation (2) in various specifications. The SVD entropy Eg positively affects the sales price at 1% significance level for all specifications. The coefficient of the quadratic term of SVD entropy E2g is also significantly positive. The cross products of the SVD entropy and the painting’s height and width are both significantly negative at very small magnitudes, implying a slightly weaker influence of Eg on the price for a bigger painting. All the results demonstrate that the information quantity, measured by the SVD entropy, can indeed be a significant predictor of the painting’s sales price. The coefficients and significance of other variables are consistent with the previous literature. For example, both the height and the width of a painting significantly enhance its sales price but with a diminishing effect. The existence of signature and date in a
painting’s image also significantly increases the painting’s value. Note that we omit the results for most dummy variables in Table 3. We put more detailed outputs in Appendix B. 4.2 robustness with topic In the art pricing literature, the topic and style of a painting have been used to explain content heterogeneity. We hold that the SVD entropy is a measure independent of topic and style and that the explanatory power of SVD entropy remains strong even when they are controlled. We first check if our results are robust against the topics, i.e., the subject matters. Renneboog and Spaenjers (2012) classify the topics of paintings into ten large categories: abstract, animals, landscape, nude, people, portrait, religion, self-portrait, still life, and urban. Their classification strategy is implemented by matching the first few words in the title of a given painting with the set of keywords defined for each topic.17 Following the same methodology, we successfully obtain those records that can be labeled by topic, which account for approximately 23% of our original sample. We focus on this sample of 123,221 observations and construct topic dummies based on the above classification criteria. The ten topic dummies correspond to ten subsamples of distinct topics. Table 4 provides the descriptive statistics of the SVD entropy for each of them. We can observe that the standard deviations are typically larger than the differences in the means. It indicates that the SVD entropy adds new information different from that provided by the topic. Among all the topics, we can see the SVD entropy of nude has the smallest mean but the largest standard deviation. In contrast, the entropy of still life has the largest mean while the smallest standard deviation. So we may infer that the paintings that depict still life have much smaller content variations than those depicting nude in terms of how much information is delivered. We introduce the topic dummy Topici as an additional control variable, and run
17See Appendix C for the detailed keywords table. regressions according to Equation (3). log pi = αEi + K∑ k=1 βkXki + T∑ t=1 γtDit + δ Topici + i, (3)
Table 5 presents the regression results. They are almost the same as the baseline regressions in Table 3. For example, in Specification (5), the painting size also slightly negatively moderates the effect of the information quantity Eg. Furthermore, we run the subsample regression for each topic category. Table 6 summarizes the coefficients of Eg, their significance levels, as well as the adjusted R squared from all the subsample regressions according to Specification (2) in Table 3. For every topic, the SVD entropy positively affects the sales price very significantly. When the magnitudes of the coefficients are compared, we observe that the SVD entropy has the largest impact on still life while the smallest impact on nude. This result is consistent with the statistical properties of SVD entropies from these two topic categories reported in Table 4. 4.3 robustness with style In addition to topic, style or movement is another content description for a painting. For example, Renneboog and Spaenjers (2012) also classify paintings into thirteen styles, such as renaissance, baroque, and pop.18 As our main database FindArtInfo does not provide the style label for an artwork item, we try to supplement this information from WikiArt, which has a large number of paintings with style labels but no prices. By matching the artist name and the painting title from these two databases, we obtain 21,027 observations whose auction prices and styles are both available. Note that this sample is much smaller than the previous sample with topic labels. As WikiArt adopts a much finer style classification than Renneboog and Spaenjers (2012), our sample finally obtains more than eighty distinct styles.19 For brevity, Table 7 only presents the descriptive statistics of the SVD entropies for the top 10 styles ranked by the number of observations in the sample. The paintings of the top 10 styles account for 68.6% of this sample. 18The thirteen styles in Renneboog and Spaenjers (2012) include: medieval & renaissance; baroque; rococo; neoclassicism; romanticism; realism; impressionism & symbolism; fauvism & expressionism; cubism, futurism & constructivism; dada & surrealism; abstract expressionism; pop; and minimalism & contemporary. 19Please refer to WikiArt for the detailed style classifications. Limited by the sample size, we will not run the subsample regression (i.e., style by style) as in the robustness analysis of topic. We only run the aggregate regression by introducing the new control of style dummy Stylei as follows:
log pi = αEi + K∑ k=1 βkXki + T∑ t=1 γtDit + η Stylei + i, (4)
Table 8 presents the regression outputs. The results (Specificatons (2) and (3) in Table 8) are mostly similar to what we obtained before. We also want to further control the topic for the above regression. So, we apply the previous topic classification methodology to this sample with style labels. We find that 69% of this sample is either Untitled or Unknown, and the rest can then be classified into the regular ten topic categories.20 Controlling both the topic and the style of a painting (Specifications (4) and (5) in Table 8) does not change the result either: the SVD entropy still positively affects the sales price of the painting at 1% significance level. 20See Appendix C for the details. 5 discussion on the application So far, we demonstrate that Eg, the SVD entropy that measures the amount of backbone information of a painting, can significantly positively affect the sales price of the painting in a robust way. Nowadays, it is very convenient to obtian a high-quality digital image for almost any painting. So, creating some kind of measurements based on the pixel-level information will surely find more and more applications in art pricing research. The most common measurements in literature are color variables. However, we show below that the color attributes of a painting, although being objective measurements too, may not be robust regressors for the sales price. The literature generally finds that the percentage of blue or red in a painting can fetch a price premium based on various testing samples (e.g., the Picasso sample in Stepanova (2019) and the shape/pattern-controlled sample in Ma et al. (2022)). In this paper, we construct similar color measurements, i.e., the percentages of blue and red (denoted as Redpct and Bluepct), and test their effects on the painting’s sales price based on the matched sample with style labels.21 The results in Table 9 show that the percentage of red is not significant while the percentage of blue even has a negative effect on the sales price. Furthermore, neither blue nor red color percentage interacts with Eg. It implies that the color compositions cannot affect price via the Shannon information channel. So, if we can extract the Shannon information from colors, it must be derived from the colors’ attachments to the painting’s structural elements like line, shape, form, etc., which we define as backbone information before. In that case, removing colors from an image may not lose the image’s Shannon information. Our testing sample can be considered a random sample as it is obtained from the matching of two different databases. So we can say that compared to the color attributes, the SVD entropy is more robust against the sample selection. Moreover, we will show below that the SVD entropy also improves the model fit more than the other commonly adopted variables that describe a painting’s content. 21We define the percentage of red as the proportion of pixels with hue values in the range of 0-14 or 165-179, and the percentage of blue as the proportion of pixels with hue values in the range of 105-134. These common content variables in the hedonic regression model include: siganiture dummy, dated dummy, topic dummy and style dummy. For the model fit comparison here, we will not consider the topic and style dummies for two reasons. First, different sources have different classification criteria, so they appear to be subjective relative to the other content variables. Second, they generally contain quite a few categories, which give them a natural advantage in increasing the R squared. So we will only focus on the three objective measurements concerning the content, i.e., the SVD entropy, the signature dummy and the dated dummy. We take two different approaches to compare each variable’s contribution to the adjusted R squared based on the largest sample (529,654 observations) used in the benchmark regression. The first approach is to control all the other variables while adding these three content variables one by one to see which improves the adjusted R squared the most. The results are presented in the upper part of Table 10. The second approach is to run the regression with the full set of variables and then omit these three variables alternatively to see which decreases the adjusted R squared the least. The lower part of Table 10 shows the results. Both approaches indicate that the SVD entropy Eg enhances the model fit more than the signature dummy as well as the dated dummy. Note that the improvement brought by each variable to the model’s R squared appears small. This is because the regression includes more than three thousand regressors, so each single variable’s contribution is diminished. In sum, considering the SVD entropy’s convenient data accessibility, straightforward calculation algorithm, as well as its advantages in variable significance, sample robustness and model fit, we expect its wide application in future research. 6 conclusion The hedonic models of art pricing often lack fine measurements of painting content. The traditional content measurements are normally categorical data, e.g, dummies of signature, dated, topic, style, and sometimes expert assessment. This paper proposes a
new measurement to account for content heterogeneity, which is neither categorical nor subjective, i.e., the Shannon information quantity of the painting. We suggest using SVD entropy to measure the Shannon information quantity based on each painting’s digital image. Our empirical tests show that the Shannon information quantity (measured by SVD entropy) of a painting is a significant and robust pricing factor. It is also superior to the other usual content variables, such as the signature dummy and the dated dummy, in terms of the improvement to model fit. Our research demonstrates that applying computer graphic techniques to art pricing is valuable. Also, we can investigate the information in threedimensional artworks, such as sculptures and porcelains, so as to improve their pricing models. a grayscale and hsv The grayscale determines the relative distance (or grayness) between white and black.